The Project Gutenberg eBook of Louisa May Alcott, the children's friend
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Louisa May Alcott, the children's friend

Author: Edna D. Cheney

Illustrator: Elizabeth B. Comins


        
Release date: June 6, 2026 [eBook #78818]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: L. Prang & Company, 1888

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78818

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Elizabeth Tapley and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOUISA MAY ALCOTT, THE CHILDREN'S FRIEND ***




 [Illustration: “LOUISE ALCOTT”
 THE CHILDREN’S FRIEND.]




LOUISA MAY ALCOTT,

 THE CHILDREN’S FRIEND.

 BY EDNAH D. CHENEY.

 ILLUSTRATED BY LIZBETH B. COMINS.

 [Illustration]

 BOSTON:
 L. PRANG & COMPANY.




 Copyright, 1888, by L. PRANG & CO., Boston, Mass.




PREFACE.


No explanation can be necessary for offering to the children of America
a memorial of Louisa May Alcott, to whom a whole generation looks up
with honor and affection as their benefactor and friend.

This slight sketch of her life is not intended to take the place of the
full biography, which, it is hoped, will be prepared under the auspices
of her own family. The aim has been to show how truly her writings
represented herself, and came out of her own varied and fruitful life.

A word more should be said in regard to the poems. The “Song of the
Suds” is introduced to express her sense of the poetry of labor. The
lines “To a Robin” are interesting as her childish expression. The
poems to her father and mother show the deep, filial reverence and
tenderness which were among her strongest traits. The two poems by her
father are added to indicate the love with which the orphan child, who
became so large a part of her life, was welcomed by her family, and her
father’s recognition of the motives which prompted her to exertion,
which were, not love of money or fame, but sacred duty to those whom
God had given her to cherish and bless.

This book is affectionately dedicated to the children of America.

                                                        EDNAH D. CHENEY.




LOUISA MAY ALCOTT,

THE CHILDREN’S FRIEND.

Born Nov. 29, 1832; died March 6, 1888.


It was on the twenty-ninth of November, in the good year 1832, when
a dear little baby girl came into a sweet and beautiful home in the
pleasant suburb of Germantown, near the great city of Brotherly
Love--or Philadelphia.

Very welcome was the dear baby, for she came to loving, true hearts: to
a father who was holy and good, and felt a reverence for every child;
to a mother whose great generous heart was ready to hold all in its
loving embrace; and to a little sister who was full of delight in the
baby. This baby was Louisa Alcott, the children’s friend.

A picturesque house it was, and it is still standing, though the
little town has grown into a great one, and is not so country-like and
pretty as it was then.

Her father taught a school in Philadelphia, and the little ones grew
and throve under their mother’s watchful eye.

She lived only a year or two in this first home, when the father was
obliged to give up his school and their pleasant house, and remove to
Boston.

The family went by sea from Philadelphia, and the two little girls were
all nicely dressed in clean nankeen dresses for the voyage; but they
had not been long on board before the lively Louisa was missing, and
after a long search she was brought up from the engine-room, where her
eager curiosity had carried her, and where she had a beautiful time,
with plenty of dirt. You will understand from this early frolic of hers
what a lively little child she was, full of fun and mischief, and will
not be surprised when I tell you that Nan in “Jo’s Boys” represents
herself, and that she can describe her scrapes so well because she had
been in them all.

The little story, “Poppy’s Pranks,” is a true account of the first
years of her life in Boston, when she got lost in the streets, tumbled
into the Frog Pond, and made things generally lively for everybody
about her. She got lost and was cried about the street: “Lost! a little
girl, four years old; curly brown hair, blue eyes, had on a white frock
and green shoes; calls herself Poppy.” Still, the child was good. “Oh,
dreadfully good! for a week. Quite an angel was Poppy. So meek and
gentle, so generous and obedient, you really wouldn’t have known her.”

When she was three years old another little girl came into the home,
and was named Elizabeth, for that dear, good woman, Elizabeth P.
Peabody, who was then helping Mr. Alcott in the school, and who has
loved and helped everybody so much, that she is well called the
“Grandmother of Boston.”

Then a baby brother came, only to die, and the children’s hearts were
sad that they could not keep him. His little body was laid in the tomb
of their grandfather, Col. May, in the old burial-ground on the Common,
and the family always kept his birthday with loving remembrance,
because they felt his soul belonged to them, and they would know him
again in heaven.

Last of all was the little May, who was tenderly cared for by the
oldest sister, and who quarrelled with and adored the gifted Louisa.

When Louisa was only eight years old she was already fond of writing,
and she composed the poem in this book, called “The Robin.” One cold
morning the children found in the garden a little half-starved bird,
and having warmed and fed him, they felt inspired to write a touching
poem. The loving mother was so pleased with these verses that she said,
“You will grow up a Shakespeare.” Her child didn’t become that; but,
as we have one Shakespeare, perhaps it was just as well that she grew
up to be the “children’s friend,” and to write stories for them, which
have added very much to their happiness, and helped them to live better
lives.

At this time Mr. Alcott kept that school in the Masonic Temple, which
has become so famous by the account Miss Peabody has given of it. Some
things in the school at Plumfield are taken from this model, but not
much, for this was only a day school, and I don’t think the teacher
thought quite so much of making the children’s bodies strong and
giving them a jolly time as Mr. Bhaer did. But he did encourage them
to talk and to express all their earnest thoughts. “It was a school of
thirty children, mostly boys under ten years of age; well disposed,
good-natured, overflowing with animal spirits, and all but intoxicated
with play.”

Louisa never went to this school, but the children had very good times
at home. She went later to a smaller school kept by her father in the
home in Beach Street. In fact, Louisa went to school very little,
and learned all she knew from her father and mother, and the bright,
intelligent people they always had about them. She went a little while
once or twice to a child’s school and a few weeks to a district school,
but her education was very varied and irregular.

But the children were taught by their father in the pleasantest way at
home. For two hours in the morning they were either in his study or on
some shady seat in the garden under his care. He taught them much by
writing, and they each kept a journal of their work and their lives.
They wrote down words and their meanings, and often made drawings to
illustrate them. The father sometimes made pictures of the houses in
which they were staying, or the landscapes they loved, and I have seen
in one of the journals a sketch of himself, with the little Elizabeth
in his lap. One of the children wrote once, “She _said_ prayers, but I
think my resolutions to be good are prayers.”

The school in Boston was not prosperous, and Mr. Alcott went to
Concord to live in a small cottage. This house is described in “Little
Women” as Meg’s first home, but Anne never lived there after her
marriage. It had a pleasant garden full of trees; and best of all, it
had a great barn, in which the children had free range, and here they
acted out all the plays which came into their active little brains.
“Jack and the Bean Stalk” was a favorite, and they had many a tumble
from the beams in climbing up to the imaginary giant’s castle.

They lived three years in this cottage, and to the children they were
very happy ones, for they did not then understand the anxieties of the
father and mother, on whom poverty was pressing hard.

During this time Mr. Alcott went to England and brought back a
gentleman with him, who had some peculiar ideas about making a
paradise on earth. The family went to a place called Fruitlands to
try the experiment. Miss Alcott has told the story of this life in
“Transcendental Wild Oats” with such a mixture of pathos and humor that
you cannot tell whether to laugh or to cry.

They returned to Concord to another house in which the great novelist
Hawthorne afterwards lived. Here Mr. Alcott cultivated land, raising
fruit and vegetables, and there the girls first began to realize the
poverty of the family, and to feel that they must try to ease the
burdens of father and mother.

[Illustration: HOME AT CONCORD, MASS.]

And now, dear children, before I tell you how “Little Women” and
all the books you love so much were written, I want you to realize how
fully Miss Alcott had known almost all that she has described. She knew
the bitterness of poverty, when even the daily food, if not scanty,
was simple in quality and sweetened by no luxuries. All that she has
told you of the struggles of young girls, turning their dresses and
painting their shoes, and carrying a torn glove in the hand, and every
little petty misery of the toilet, she has not only seen but known. All
the sacrifices made by one sister or friend to help another, were felt
or observed by her, and all the tender, wise rebukes from father and
mother were treasured up in her memory. Scarcely an adventure in her
stories but is painted from life, altered in time and place, but still
revealing the history of some real person.

Out of their hard trials, borne with love and courage, but felt just as
keenly as other girls feel them, as out of a dark mine, she has drawn
the gold and silver and precious jewels with which she has brightened
the lives of so many children and hard-working girls; for nothing helps
us like knowing that others have suffered as we have and conquered
as we may. What was the secret of her power to do this? It was that
she kept her heart full of love and faith and courage. She was never
ashamed of the poverty or hardships she had been through, but was
proud that she could do whatever work was necessary for herself or her
family, and she was full of loving thought for everybody else, and
longing to help them in the sorrows and trials she knew so well herself.

    “This is the famous stone
    That turneth all to gold.”

You feel that Miss Alcott tells you the whole story of her life. She
shows you how she loves fun and play, and wants all children to have
plenty of it, and how children’s restless spirits may lead them to
do many wild pranks without their being really wicked; but she also
shows you that when they really do wrong or cherish wrong feelings, or
are careless or inconsiderate of others’ feelings and happiness, they
suffer very much from it, and more in their own hearts than in any
other way.

Here is a little picture of the “rooms in the heart,” which was the
children’s real experience, a lesson which they never lost, but to
which, even to their latest day, they looked for guidance in their
conduct. The passage occurs in “Little Men”:--

  “‘Well, it’s one of my private plays, and I’ll tell you, but I
  think you’ll laugh at it,’ began Demi, glad to hold forth on this
  congenial subject. ‘I play that my mind is a round room, and my soul
  is a little sort of creature with wings that lives in it. The walls
  are full of shelves and drawers, and in them I keep my thoughts, and
  my goodness and badness, and all sorts of things. The goods I keep
  where I can see them, and the bads I lock up tight, but they get out,
  and I have to keep putting them in and squeezing them down, they are
  so strong. The thoughts I play with when I am alone or in bed, and I
  make up and do what I like with them. Every Sunday I put my room in
  order, and talk with the little spirit that lives there, and tell him
  what to do. He is very bad sometimes, and won’t mind me, and I have
  to scold him, and take him to grandpa. He always makes him behave,
  and be sorry for his faults, because grandpa likes this play, and
  gives me nice things to put in the drawers, and tells me how to shut
  up the naughties. Hadn’t you better try that way? it’s a very good
  one’; and Demi looked so earnest and full of faith that Dan did not
  laugh at his quaint fancy, but said soberly:--

  “‘I don’t think there is a lock strong enough to keep my badness shut
  up. Any way, my room is in such a clutter I don’t know how to clear
  it up.’”

In telling you about Miss Alcott’s childhood, I must tell you how fond
she was of animals. She delighted in dogs, though she never possessed
one, but she has made the performing dog Sanch as real and interesting
as any of her children, and the story of the little raspberry girls
watering sheep in the crowded cattle car might well rouse up the
railroad men to their duty of sparing these poor, patient animals all
needless suffering. But cats were the especial pets of the household;
the children played with them and tended them in sickness, and buried
them when dead, and Louisa embalmed their memory in the story of the
“Seven Black Cats.”

Amid the discomforts of travel she could get pleasure from her favorite
animals:--

  “Up the hill they went after breakfast; and balm was found for the
  old lady’s woes in the sight of many Angora cats, of great size and
  beauty. White as snow, with tails like plumes, and mild, yellow eyes,
  were these charmers. At every window sat one; on every door-step
  sprawled a bunch of down; and frequently the eye of the tabby-loving
  spinster was gladdened by the touching spectacle of a blond mamma in
  the bosom of her family.

  “‘If I could only carry it, I’d have one of those dears, no matter
  what it cost!’ cried Lavinia, more captivated by a live cat than by
  all the dead Huguenots that Catherine de Medicis hung over the castle
  walls on a certain memorable occasion.”

Dolls were equally dear to her. They seem to form the “missing link” in
a child’s heart between animate and inanimate nature. Louisa made hers
do everything that a human being could do. They were fed, educated,
punished, rewarded, nursed, and even hung and buried; and the story of
the little girls who sent their dolls on a journey for the pleasure of
hearing their adventures, seemed hardly an exaggeration to her:--

  “As soon as Flora and Dora recovered from the bewilderment occasioned
  by the confusion of the post-office, they found themselves in one of
  the many leathern mail-bags rumbling Eastward. As it was perfectly
  dark, they could not see their companions, so listened to the
  whispering and rustling that went on about them. The newspapers all
  talked politics, and some of them used such bad language that the
  dolls would have covered their ears, if their hands had not been tied
  down. The letters were better behaved and more interesting, for they
  told one another the news they carried, because nothing is private in
  America, and even gummed envelopes cannot keep gossip from leaking
  out.

  “‘It is very interesting, but I should enjoy it more if I was
  not grinding my nose against the rough side of this leather bag,’
  whispered Dora, who lay undermost just then.

  “‘So should I, if a heavy book was not pinching my toes. I’ve tried
  to kick it away, but it won’t stir, and keeps droning on about
  reports and tariffs and such dull things,’ answered Flora, with a
  groan.

  “‘Do you like travelling?’ asked Dora, presently, when the letters
  and papers fell asleep, lulled by the motion of the cars.

  “‘Not yet, but I shall when I can look about me. This bundle near by
  says the mails are often sorted in the cars, and in that way we shall
  see something of the world, I hope,’ answered Flora, cheering up,
  for, like her mamma, she was of an inquiring turn.

  “The dolls took a nap of some hours, and were roused by a general
  tumbling out on a long shelf, where many other parcels lay, and
  lively men sent letters and papers flying here and there as if a
  whirlwind was blowing. A long box lay beside the dolls who stood
  nearly erect leaning against a pile of papers. Several holes were
  cut in the lid, and out of one of them was thrust a little black
  nose, as if trying to get air.”

This real feeling of the Alcott children adds to the pathos of the
sacrifice to the Kitty Mouse in “Little Men”:--

  “The superb success of this last offering excited Teddy to such
  a degree that he first threw his lamb into the conflagration, and
  before it had time even to roast he planted poor, dear Annabella on
  the funeral pyre. Of course she did not like it, and expressed her
  anguish and resentment in a way that terrified her infant destroyer.
  Being covered with kid, she did not blaze, but did what was worse,
  she _squirmed_. First one leg curled up, then the other, in a very
  awful and life-like manner; next, she flung her arms over her head
  as if in great agony; her head itself turned on her shoulders, her
  glass eyes fell out, and with one final writhe of her whole body she
  sank down a blackened mass on the ruins of the town. This unexpected
  demonstration startled every one, and frightened Teddy half out of
  his little wits. He looked, then screamed, and fled toward the house,
  roaring ‘Marmar,’ at the top of his voice.”

As soon as the girls were old enough to comprehend the needs of the
family, their earnest desire was to help in its support.

Louisa naturally chose her father’s profession of teaching, and began
when very young to teach some of the children of the neighborhood. One
or both the sisters taught school at various times, and Louisa was
governess in a rich family in Boston.

She never disdained any work that promised help towards her object. Her
mother at one time opened an intelligence office, and when a gentleman
applied for some one to “help” in the family, “to be treated with the
greatest consideration and kindness,” she said, “Mother, why can’t I
go?” Her mother allowed her to try the experiment, but it proved a hard
experience. She has herself told the story, and it shows how much a
poor “hired girl” may suffer from want of respect and consideration,
even from the “best families.”

The family struggled long with poverty, and often ate the bitter bread
of dependence. But they were never so poor but they had something
to share with those in need, and the generous spirit of the mother
is justly shown in the opening scene of “Little Women,” where the
Christmas breakfast is given to the poor German family.

The fugitive slave was safe within their territory, and was hidden in
the barn, and even in the old brick oven, when his persecutors came in
search of him. From stories which Louisa learned from these men, came
the wonderful tale of “My Contraband,” the most powerful and passionate
of any of her stories in “Hospital Sketches,” and also “An Hour,” which
tells of the slaves’ eager longing for liberty.

At a later period a band of houseless emigrants were encamped in the
yard of their house in Boston, from which act of perhaps inconsiderate
charity came a run of smallpox for all the household.

This period of the girlish life of the family is represented in her
famous “Little Women,” the most popular story book for children ever
written.

The father’s character is but slightly indicated, and he does not take
a very active share in this story. But as if, of purpose to give him
due respect, in the opening chapter of the second volume, she describes
his life, saying, “the quiet man sitting among his books was still head
of the family, the household conscience, anchor and comforter.”

In “Eli’s Education” she has given the early life of her father,
who had to struggle hard for his education. His influence upon his
daughters was very strong and deep, although less apparent than the
mother’s.

This extract will show how he began life:--

  “His father had no patience with him, called him a shiftless dreamer,
  and threatened to burn the beloved books. But his mother defended
  him, for he was her youngest, and the pride of her heart; so she let
  him scribble all over her floors before she scrubbed them up, dipped
  extra thick candles for his use, saved every scrap of paper to swell
  his little store, and firmly believed that he would turn out the
  great man of the family. His brothers joked about his queer ways,
  but in his sisters he found firm friends and tender comforters for
  all his woes. So he struggled along, working on the farm in summer
  and in a clock shop during the winter, with such brief spells of
  schooling as he could get between whiles, improving even these poor
  opportunities so well that he was letter-writer for all the young
  people in the neighborhood.

  “Now, he was writing in his journal very slowly, but very well,
  shaping his letters with unusual grace and freedom; for the wide
  snow-banks were his copybooks in winter, and on their white pages he
  had learned to sweep splendid capitals or link syllables handsomely
  together. This is what he wrote that night, with a sparkle in the
  blue eyes and a firm folding of the lips that made the boyish face
  resolute and manly:--

  “‘I am set in my own mind that I get learning. I see not how, but my
  will is strong, and mother hopes for to make a scholar of me. So,
  please God, we shall do it.’

  “Then he shut the little book and put it carefully away in the
  blue chest, with pen and ink, as if they were very precious things;
  piously said his prayers, and was soon asleep under the homespun
  coverlet, dreaming splendid dreams, while a great bright star looked
  in at the low window, as if waiting to show him the road to fortune.”

Miss Alcott’s mother was a woman of large, generous nature and fine
intellectual powers. She is well represented by Mrs. March in “Little
Women” in her motherly relations. Her early life is told in the “Story
of Aunt Abby.”

Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy are characteristic portraits of the four girls.
Meg, or Anne, was the domestic, home-loving sister with the gentle
disposition of the father, and she knew the happy marriage and sad
widowhood described in “Jo’s Boys.” The writer herself is represented
in the warm-blooded, impetuous, generous Jo; overflowing with life
and talent, strong and rash in her judgment, high and heroic in her
purposes, refined, idealized, and ever held up by the high spiritual
influences which her father’s thought and life shed around her, though
she sympathized more with her practical mother. Her sympathy with
others, her delight in blessing them, her keen understanding of their
natures and trials, are all true of the girl who was to develop into
such strong, noble womanhood. It is not true that she courted under an
umbrella or married a German professor, but she has so well imagined
the matrimonial conclusion which was demanded for the story, that we
are tempted to wish it were. She reappears in “Little Men,” “Jo’s
Boys,” “Old-fashioned Girl,” and many other stories.

The tender Elizabeth (the Beth of the story) drooped in her young
maidenhood even as the tale reports, and the father sat alone by the
beautiful body of his child all night in silence. The mother’s heart,
which had borne so many trials, was never quite blithe after this long
watching of two years, ending in the loss of her cherished child.

Every one who knew the young, enthusiastic, artistic May Alcott,
recognized her in the charming sketch of “Amy.” Beautifully idealized
by her sister’s genius, her little faults and peculiarities are
delicately sketched in, and we can see her stately walk, and recognize
the child-like, loving spirit which never forsook her. She had her
youthful romances and day-dreams, but she did not marry Laurie, nor
live to enjoy the blessings of motherhood and family life. She went
abroad in 1878 for improvement in art, in which she had much success,
and married a Swiss gentleman. Death closed her happy married life
of only a few months. She left her baby, a girl, to the care of her
sister Louisa, who sent out to Europe for the little nursling, and ever
afterwards cherished her as her own child. The verses of Mr. Alcott
show how the motherless child was welcomed into heart and home.

“Who was Laurie?” is a question asked by many children. No one boy
united all his traits, but three of their neighbors’ children in
Concord were especially intimate in the Alcott family, and supplied
letters for the post-office and other incidents of the story. But the
most perfect type of the accomplished, generous Laurie was a young
Polish lad whom Miss Alcott met in Europe.

No one can help seeing in her stories her fondness for boys. She loved
the bold, free spirit of adventure in them, the chivalric devotion
and self-sacrifice, the eagerness for knowledge of life, rather than
of books. She always held up a high standard, and believed in their
future, in spite of all boyish faults and follies. Consequently she
was warmly beloved, and “Jo’s Boys” was not merely a fiction of the
imagination, but a reality of the heart.

As soon as the war broke out, Miss Alcott could not rest at home, but
eagerly offered her services as nurse in the army hospitals. She had
been brought up in anti-slavery principles, and was full of patriotic
zeal and sympathy for the soldiers.

She has told the story of her work in “Hospital Sketches,” which is
very largely a mere transcript of letters which she sent home to her
family. She was stricken with fever while on duty, and returned home to
suffer many weeks of illness, and she never recovered from the terrible
strain upon her nervous system. The suffering she had witnessed and the
intense excitement of the war produced a fever of the brain, and the
peaceful chamber at Concord became so filled with harrowing visions
that she never loved to be there afterwards.

Miss Alcott never liked teaching, and longed for more congenial
occupation. When about nineteen or twenty she became enamoured of the
stage, and was very eager to develop her dramatic talent as an actress,
but wiser counsels restrained her. She has indicated this experience
in “Work,” which gives a great deal of her own life and struggles. She
understood her own powers and her own defects, and while she saw it was
not the life for her, she was sensible to its fascinations as well as
its dangers.

  “On the night of the benefit, Lucy was in a most exasperating
  mood, Christie in a very indignant one, and as they entered their
  dressing-room they looked as if they might have played the ‘Rival
  Queens’ with great effect. Lucy offered no help and Christie asked
  none, but putting her vexation resolutely out of sight, fixed her
  mind on the task before her.

  “As the pleasant stir began all about her, actress-like, she felt
  her spirits rise, her courage increase with every curl she fastened
  up, every gay garment she put on, and soon smiled approvingly at
  herself, for excitement lent her cheeks a better color than rouge;
  her eyes shone with satisfaction, and her heart beat high with a
  resolve to make a hit or die.

  “Christie needed encouragement that night, and found it in the
  hearty welcome that greeted her, and the full house, which proved
  how kind a regard was entertained for her by many who knew her only
  by a fictitious name. She felt this deeply, and it helped her much,
  for she was vexed with many trials those before the footlights knew
  nothing of....

  “But, in spite of all annoyances, she had never played better in her
  life. She liked the part, and acted the warm-hearted, quick-witted,
  sharp-tongued Peg with a spirit and grace that surprised even those
  who knew her best. Especially good was she in the scenes with
  Triplet, for Kent played the part admirably, and cheered her on with
  many an encouraging look and word. Anxious to do honor to her patron
  and friend, she threw her whole heart into the work; in the scene
  where she comes like a good angel to the home of the poor playwright,
  she brought tears to the eyes of her audience; and when, at her
  command, Triplet strikes up a jig to amuse the children, she ‘covered
  the buckle’ in gallant style, dancing with all the frolicsome
  _abandon_ of the Irish orange-girl, who for a moment forgot her
  grandeur and her grief.

  “That scene was her best, for it is full of those touches of nature
  that need very little art to make them effective; and when a great
  bouquet fell with a thump at Christie’s feet, as she paused to bow
  her thanks for an encore, she felt that she had reached the height of
  earthly bliss.”

But writing of poems, and especially of stories, was her earliest
love, and she now began to pursue this work earnestly. She wrote
stories which she sent secretly to the newspapers, and great was her
joy when they were accepted, and wild the excitement of the little
family over the first money which she thus earned. With marvellous
facility she poured out sheet after sheet of the wildest romances,
full of passionate declamation and soul-stirring adventure. They were
published in _Gleason’s Pictorial_, and were in constant demand, and
thus brought her much-needed money.

But she found that she was not in her true path. She was writing for
money only, and not from an earnest purpose to represent life truly,
and to disseminate a sweet and wholesome influence. She has described
this experience in “Little Women.” But it was only frivolity and
excitement, not positive evil in which she had indulged, and we must
not infer too much from her self-accusations. How entirely her later
writings redeemed this early fault, all will admit, for her highest
praise is for the healthy, moral influence of her books. No one would
have condemned her as severely as she does herself. She thus tells the
story of her abandonment of this work:--

  “As soon as she went to her room, she got out her papers, and
  carefully re-read every one of her stories. Being a little
  short-sighted, Mr. Bhaer sometimes used eye-glasses, and Jo had tried
  them once, smiling to see how they magnified the fine print of her
  book; now she seemed to have got on the professor’s mental or moral
  spectacles also, for the faults of these poor stories glared at her
  dreadfully, and filled her with dismay.

  “‘They _are_ trash, and will soon be worse than trash if I go on; for
  each is more sensational than the last. I’ve gone blindly on, hurting
  myself and other people, for the sake of money; I know it’s so, for I
  can’t read this stuff in sober earnest without being horribly ashamed
  of it; and _what should_ I do if they were seen at home, or Mr. Bhaer
  got hold of them?’

  “Jo turned hot at the bare idea, and stuffed the whole bundle into
  her stove, nearly setting the chimney afire with the blaze.

  “‘Yes, that’s the best place for such inflammable nonsense; I’d
  better burn the house down, I suppose, than let other people blow
  themselves up with my gunpowder,’ she thought, as she watched the
  ‘Demon of the Jura’ whisk away, a little black cinder with fiery eyes.

  “But when nothing remained of all her three months’ work, except a
  heap of ashes, and the money in her lap, Jo looked sober, as she sat
  on the floor, wondering what she ought to do about her wages.

  “‘I think I haven’t done much harm _yet_, and may keep this to pay
  for my time,’ she said, after a long meditation, adding, impatiently,
  ‘I almost wish I hadn’t any conscience, it’s so inconvenient. If
  I didn’t care about doing right, and didn’t feel uncomfortable
  when doing wrong, I should get on capitally. I can’t help wishing,
  sometimes, that father and mother hadn’t been so dreadfully
  particular about such things.’

  “Ah, Jo, instead of wishing that, thank God that ‘father and mother
  _were_ particular,’ and pity from your heart those who have no
  such guardians to hedge them round with principles which may seem
  like prison walls to impatient youth, but which will prove sure
  foundations to build character upon in womanhood.

  “Jo wrote no more sensational stories, deciding that the money did
  not pay for her share of the sensation.”

In 1855 she published a little volume called “Flower Fables,” which she
had written for one of her friends when sixteen years old. She received
thirty-two dollars for it.

It was probably about this time that a friendly publisher gave her the
advice, “Louisa, give up writing, stick to your teaching,” accompanying
his unwelcome advice with a small sum of money. “When I make my little
pot of gold by writing, I will repay you this,” she said. When in a few
years she received a handsome sum of copyright money, she thought she
had found the “pot of gold,” and returned the money, as she had not
taken the advice.

In 1864 she published a more ambitious story or novel, entitled
“Moods.” While there is much to indicate her future power, the book has
not the charm of her later stories, and it did not succeed with the
public.

Perhaps she never felt such discouragement as from the severe
criticisms of this book, on which she had spent much time and labor.
But her motive for exertion was too strong to allow her to yield
to despondency. She wisely turned to the life which she thoroughly
understood, and in 1868 produced, out of her own family experience,
“Little Women,” which at once won the hearts of all the children, and
established her fame and fortune. The children throughout the land
recognized her as their friend and their story-teller, and the second
series, which should complete the story, was waited for with as much
impatience as the news of a battle.

Vehement was the indignation when Jo refused to make Laurie happy, and
young girls cried themselves sick over the pathetic passages of the
story.

Violent as the excitement was, it was not transient. This book has
commanded a steady sale ever since, and secured a welcome from
publisher and public for everything which she afterwards wrote.

She has herself given a most amusing description in “Jo’s Boys” of this
success, as well as of the somewhat oppressive attentions which were
poured upon her. She always shrank from any public demonstrations,
and remained as simple, straightforward, natural, impulsive, and
warm-hearted as a woman as she was when a child.

  “The March family had enjoyed a great many surprises in the course
  of their varied career, but the greatest of all was when the Ugly
  Duckling turned out to be, not a swan, but a golden goose, whose
  literary eggs found such an unexpected market that in ten years Jo’s
  wildest and most cherished dream actually came true. How or why it
  happened she never clearly understood, but all of a sudden she found
  herself famous in a small way, and, better still, with a snug little
  fortune in her pocket to clear away the obstacles of the present and
  assure the future of her boys....

  “Things always went by contraries with Jo. Her first book, labored
  over for years, and launched full of the high hopes and ambitious
  dreams of youth, foundered on its voyage. The hastily written story,
  sent away with no thought beyond the few dollars it might bring,
  sailed with a fair wind and a wise pilot at the helm straight into
  public favor, and came home heavily laden with an unexpected cargo of
  gold and glory....

  “It was the power of making her mother’s last years happy and serene;
  to see the burden of care laid down forever, the weary hands at rest,
  the dear face untroubled by any anxiety, and the tender heart free
  to pour itself out in the wise charity which was its delight. As a
  girl, Jo’s favorite plan had been a room where Marmee could sit in
  peace and enjoy herself after her hard, heroic life. Now the dream
  had become a happy fact, and Marmee sat in her pleasant chamber
  with every comfort and luxury about her, loving daughters to wait
  on her as infirmities increased, a faithful mate to lean upon, and
  grandchildren to brighten the twilight of life with their dutiful
  affection. A very precious time to all, for she rejoiced, as only
  mothers can, in the good fortunes of their children. She had lived to
  reap the harvest she sowed; had seen prayers answered, hopes blossom,
  good gifts bear fruit, peace and prosperity bless the home she had
  made; and then, like some brave, patient angel, whose work was done,
  turned her face heavenward, glad to rest.”

Dearer than all the fame was the power she gained by her writings to
lift her family out of poverty and care into welfare and luxury. Her
father was “throned in philosophic ease,” and every taste gratified;
his library replenished, his books re-bound, and his leisure made
peaceful and serene.

It was sweet to see the motherly hands, which had toiled so long for
every member of the household, resting in calm satisfaction. The
widowed sister and the dear nephews were helped in every emergency;
the young artist was furnished with means to go abroad and pursue her
career; the little babe was surrounded with every comfort; the old age
of the mother was made peaceful and happy, and the long, slow passage
of her father to the grave was smoothed with every attention and care.

Nor did her beneficence end at home. She did not have a Plumfield
school for boys, but she had her boys, whose career she watched
with constant love and care, and whom she sent to Europe to study,
or aided with means at home, as their needs required. The circle of
her influence was ever widening, and her charity flowed out to many
who never knew its source. She was constantly appealed to for advice
by young writers, and though she gave severe criticism, she readily
acknowledged merit and success. She gave sympathy and help to every
good reform, and was an ardent advocate of Woman’s Suffrage and other
plans for the advancement of women.

In 1865 her long-cherished desire of a visit to Europe was gratified.
She went as companion to an invalid lady. She left her on the Continent
and went alone to England, where she visited dear friends, and had
a delightful time. Very little of this experience appears in her
books, and she very seldom goes out of her native surroundings for
her characters and incidents. She was thoroughly American in all her
feelings, and she studied daily life more than old books and chronicles.

Four or five years later she went again to Europe with her youngest
sister and a friend. She has given a very lively and interesting
account of this journey in “Shawl Straps,” in which she rather
caricatures herself as the old lady of the party, for she was not yet
forty. But ill-health had thrown its saddening influence over her, and
the hints of physical and nervous suffering are only too real. She was
called home by news of the sudden death of her beloved brother-in-law.
She has told the sweet, touching story of his death in “Little Men”:--

  “‘He was only ill a few hours, and died as he had lived, so
  cheerfully, so peacefully, that it seems a sin to mar the beauty of
  it with any violent or selfish grief. We were in time to say good-by;
  and Daisy and Demi were in his arms as he fell asleep on Aunt Meg’s
  breast. No more now, I cannot bear it’; and Mr. Bhaer went hastily
  away quite bowed with grief, for in John Brooke he had lost both
  friend and brother, and there was no one to take his place.”

I have tried to show you how Miss Alcott’s life was revealed in her
stories, and when you wonder how she could charm and interest children
so, this is the answer: because she tells you what she knows well
herself. All her books are full of incidents treasured in her heart and
memory.

“The Grandmother” in “Old-fashioned Girl” tells the stories of
Lafayette and Madam Hancock, which she had from her mother’s lips. Some
of the methods used by Mr. Bhaer in disciplining his boys were Mr.
Alcott’s plans in his Boston school; especially making the boys whip
him instead of receiving the blows themselves.

May’s experiences furnished the story of “Class Day.”

In 1879, Miss Alcott spent some weeks at Willow Cottage, Magnolia,
where she wrote the story of “Jack and Jill.” The main part of the
story describes life in Concord, or “Harmony,” as she translates it.
But a little paragraph pictures the beautiful sea-shore place, and the
kind, bright hostess who made it such a home; and the story of the
lobsters is founded in melancholy fact. Here is her description of this
pleasant summer home:--

  “The Willows was a long, low house close to the beach, and as full as
  a bee-hive of pleasant people, all intent on having a good time. A
  great many children were swarming about, and Jill found it impossible
  to sleep after her journey,--there was such a lively clatter of
  tongues on the piazzas, and so many feet were going to and fro in the
  halls. She lay down obediently, while Mrs. Minot settled matters in
  the two airy rooms and gave her some dinner; but she kept popping up
  her head to look out of the window to see what she could see. Just
  opposite stood an artist’s cottage and studio, with all manner of
  charming galleries, towers, steps, and even a sort of drawbridge, to
  pull up when the painter wished to be left in peace. He was absent
  now, and the visitors took possession of this fine play-place.
  Children were racing up and down the galleries, ladies sitting in the
  tower, boys disporting themselves on the roof, and young gentlemen
  preparing for theatricals in the large studio.”

[Illustration: WILLOW COTTAGE, MAGNOLIA.]

The first chapter of the story gives a very lively description
of the favorite New England winter sport of “coasting,” which is a
good sketch of the scenes on the popular resort of Ponkataset Hill in
Concord:--

  “Up and down three long coasts they went as fast as legs and sleds
  could carry them. One smooth path led into the meadow, and here the
  little folk congregated; one swept across the pond, where skates went
  gayly around, like water-bugs; and the third, from the very top of
  the steep hill, ended abruptly at a rail fence on the high bank above
  the road.

  “There was a group of lads and lasses sitting or leaning on this
  fence to rest, after an exciting race, and, as they reposed, they
  amused themselves with criticising their mates still absorbed in this
  most delightful of out-door sports.”

In “Work” she describes her beloved minister, Theodore Parker, the
truest of friends; and in “Old-fashioned Girl,” two young artists who
cling to each other through all variations of life and fortune. The
doctor and the philanthropist (a beautiful girl lost on the ill-fated
“Schiller”), the actor and the lawyer, were all drawn from life.

It is this truth to real experience which gave her such power over the
hearts of children and girls, for they felt she understood and knew all
their trials, and never considered them small.

To understand other people’s feelings is the first step toward really
helping them.

A noble philanthropist said to me, “How much Louisa Alcott has done
to lead girls to right ways of thinking!” That is what she has tried
to do for you, her dear children and girls. She has tried to show how
sweet and precious home life is, and how you can always find something
to bless those right around you, and make yourselves and them happier
and better. She has taught you that homely, quiet work is never to be
despised, and that character and happiness can be built up without
great talents or large fortune. She has taught you never to despise
or despair of any child, however poor or homely or naughty, or even
sinful he may be; but to seek out the good angel in him, by which he
may be led onwards and upwards to usefulness and happiness. And she
has also taught you that if you are blessed with great gifts, with
wealth or talent, you have no right to leave them unemployed, but must
be as faithful to your large opportunities as others to their small
ones. Her boy Laurie must be shaken out of his elegant languor and
good-natured self-indulgence, as thoroughly as Dan must be civilized
out of rudeness. And the great principle which governed her own life,
and made her the benefactor and the friend of children, was loyalty to
duty in whatever form it appeared.

One of her prettiest poems is the “Song from the Suds,” and her
description of bread-making makes it as poetic as Nausicaa’s washing.

[Illustration]

“A SONG FROM THE SUDS.”

FROM “LITTLE WOMEN.”

    “Queen of my tub, I merrily sing,
      While the white foam rises high;
    And sturdily wash, and rinse, and wring,
      And fasten the clothes to dry;
    Then out in the free fresh air they swing,
      Under the sunny sky.

    “I wish we could wash from our hearts and our souls
      The stains of the week away,
    And let water and air by their magic make
      Ourselves as pure as they;
    Then on the earth there would be indeed
      A glorious washing day!

    “Along the path of a useful life
      Will heart’s-ease ever bloom;
    The busy mind has no time to think
      Of sorrow, or care, or gloom;
    And anxious thoughts may be swept away
      As we busily wield a broom.

    “I am glad a task to me is given,
      To labor at day by day;
    For it brings me health, and strength, and hope,
      And I cheerfully learn to say,--
    ‘Head you may think, Heart you may feel,
      But Hand you shall work alway!’”

In the little story of the “Jerseys” she has sketched her idea of a
true woman, as she wants her girls to be.

How full of life the teacher is, as described by the school-girls:--

  “‘She’s not a bit of a fashion-plate, but a splendid woman, just
  natural and hearty and sweet.’ Even her clothes have a superior air
  about them. ‘Her jersey fits splendidly! There she is now! Girls,
  she’s running! Do come and see!’

  “All ran in time to see a tall young lady come up the wide path at a
  good pace, looking as fresh and blithe as the Goddess of Health.”

This healthy, wise teacher shows the girls the folly of many of
their conventional notions, and encourages them in their efforts
for broader lives, “and long after they were scattered apart, they
remembered the lessons which helped them to be what their good friend
hoped--healthful, happy, and useful women.”

The high spiritual religion of her father, the warm, human affections
of her mother, full of natural joy in life, and knowing that mirth and
fun helped the world on, as well as seriousness and labor, blended in
Miss Alcott’s work in such delightful humor, that tears and smiles are
alike ready at her call; and whatever she writes you find, as Burns
says,--

    “Perhaps it may turn out a song,
    Perhaps turn out a sermon.”

How tenderly the children feel for the little dog who has lost his
beautiful tail, as if they had known what it was to be doggies
themselves! How she enjoys Jacko’s fun, and enters into the life of the
circus boy; and even sympathizes with the poor rough bear, who tried
to live in freedom in the woods, but came back to his prison to die!
She has the blessed power of imagination, by which she can “put herself
into another’s place,” and feel his experiences as if they were her own.

It seems a pleasant thing to write all these beautiful stories for
children, and perhaps some of you will resolve to follow her example
in writing. But, remember, nothing can be done without hard work, and
Miss Alcott wrote many an hour when she felt sick and weary, and would
gladly have lain down in some quiet place to rest. Her fingers became
cramped with holding a pen so much, and her head was dizzy and weary
with thinking out her stories, and correcting proofs, beside having
many a care. Then the dear old mother died; and not many years after
the father was stricken with paralysis, and for almost six years the
two sisters cared for him when he was feeble as a little child.

So she became tired out, and she went to a good friendly home to rest.
A whole year she was there, and we fondly hoped she was regaining the
strength she had used to help and bless so many people. But

    “The silver cord was loosed, and the golden bowl was broken.”

A cold brought on a severe attack in head and throat, and she lay
unconscious and helpless. Her father’s serene life had closed two days
before, and as the dear friends of the family gathered to pay their
tribute of affection and respect to him, they heard the thrilling
words, “Louisa Alcott is dead!”

Those words reached over many lands, and everywhere children mourned as
for a dear friend gone from them. She was ready and willing to go; but
it was hard for them to be willing to spare her, to know that no new
words would come from her pen, no more lessons of help and strength for
their lives.

But let us be thankful that her beautiful, generous heart had poured
itself out so lavishly in words of wisdom and beauty, that we can never
feel that she is gone from us; we can turn again and again to the
stories in which she has told us her life, and thank God that Louisa
Alcott lived.

She was taken to the beautiful town where her girlhood was passed, and
“her boys” went as her guard of honor to the tomb.

In that Sleepy Hollow, where Emerson and Hawthorne, too, were placed,
her worn-out frame was laid to rest. She asked to be laid across the
feet of father, mother, and sister, “to take care of them as she had
done all her life.”

My little friends, you may not one of you have the great talents which
made Miss Alcott _famous_, but every one of you can try to have her
spirit of love and duty, can follow in the paths she has pointed out,
and, like her, receive the Father’s blessing on “Duty’s faithful child.”

[Illustration: SLEEPY HOLLOW CEMETERY. CONCORD, MASS.]




POEMS.


    “_Then let the Book receive in these prompt lines
    A just memorial; and thine eyes consent
    To read that they who mark their course behold
    A life declining with the golden light
    Of summer in the season of sere leaves;
    See cheerfulness undamped by stealing Time;
    See studied kindness flow with easy stream,
    Illustrated with inborn courtesy;
    And an habitual disregard of self
    Balanced by vigilance for others’ weal._”

                                          WORDSWORTH.


TO A ROBIN.

    Welcome, welcome little stranger,
      Fear no harm and fear no danger,
    We are glad to see you here,
      For you sing sweet Spring is near.

    Now the white snow melts away,
      Now the flowers blossom gay,
    Come dear bird and build your nest,
      For we love our Robin best.

[Illustration]


[Illustration: “SAFE YE ANGELS KEEP THIS CHILD”]

TO LOUISA ALCOTT NIERIKER.

BY HER GRANDFATHER.

    Voyager across the seas,
      In my arms thy form I press;
    Come, my baby, me to please,
      Blue-eyed nurseling, motherless!

    All is strange and beautiful;
      Every sense finds glad surprise;
    Life is lovely, wonderful,
      Faces fair and beaming eyes.

    Safe, ye angels, keep this child,
      Life-long guard her innocence,
    Winsome ways, and temper mild;
      Heaven, our home, be her defence!


[Illustration: IN MEMORIAM]

TRANSFIGURATION.

IN MEMORIAM.

[Lines written by Louisa M. Alcott on the death of her mother.]

    Mysterious death! who in a single hour
        Life’s gold can so refine,
        And by thy art divine
    Change mortal weakness to immortal power!

    Bending beneath the weight of eighty years,
        Spent with the noble strife
        Of a victorious life,
    We watched her fading heavenward through our tears.

    But ere the sense of loss our hearts had wrung,
        A miracle was wrought,
        And swift as happy thought
    She lived again, brave, beautiful, and young.

    Age, pain, and sorrow dropped the veils they wore,
        And showed the tender eyes
        Of angels in disguise,
    Whose discipline so patiently she bore.

    The past years brought their harvest rich and fair,
        While memory and love
        Together fondly wove
    A golden garland for the silver hair.

    How could we mourn like those who are bereft,
        When every pang of grief
        Found balm for its relief
    In counting up the treasures she had left?

    Faith that withstood the shocks of toil and time,
        Hope that defied despair,
        Patience that conquered care,
    And Loyalty whose courage was sublime.

    The great deep heart that was a home for all;
        Just, eloquent, and strong,
        In protest against wrong;
    Wide charity that knew no sin, no fall.

    The Spartan spirit that made life so grand,
        Mating poor, daily needs
        With high, heroic deeds,
    That wrested happiness from Fate’s hard hand.

    We thought to weep, but sing for joy instead,
        Full of the grateful peace
        That follows her release;
    For nothing but the weary dust lies dead.

    O noble woman! never more a queen
        Than in the laying down
        Of sceptre and of crown,
    To win a greater kingdom yet unseen.

    Teaching us how to seek the highest goal;
        To earn the true success;
        To live, to love, to bless,
    And make death proud to take a royal soul.

[Published in “A Masque of the Poets,” Roberts Brothers, 1878.]


[Illustration: TO MY FATHER]

TO MY FATHER

ON HIS EIGHTY-SIXTH BIRTHDAY.

    Dear Pilgrim, waiting patiently,
      The long, long journey nearly done,
    Beside the sacred stream that flows
      Clear shining in the western sun;
    Look backward on the varied road
      Your steadfast feet have trod,
    From youth to age, through weal and woe,
      Climbing forever nearer God.

    Mountain and valley lie behind;
      The slough is crossed, the wicket passed;
    Doubt and despair, sorrow and sin,
      Giant and fiend, conquered at last.
    Neglect is changed to honor now;
      The heavy cross may be laid down;
    The white head wins and wears at length
      The prophet’s, not the martyr’s crown.

    Greatheart and Faithful gone before,
      Brave Christiana, Mercy sweet,
    Are Shining Ones who stand and wait
      The weary wanderer to greet.
    Patience and Love his handmaids are,
      And till time brings release,
    Christian may rest in that bright room
      Whose windows open to the east.

    The staff set by, the sandals off,
      Still pondering the precious scroll,
    Serene and strong, he waits the call
      That frees and wings a happy soul;
    Then, beautiful as when it lured
      The boy’s aspiring eyes,
    Before the pilgrim’s longing sight
      Shall the Celestial City rise.

  Nov. 29, 1885.                    L. M. A.


TO LOUISA MAY ALCOTT.

BY HER FATHER.

    When I remember with what buoyant heart,
      Midst war’s alarms and woes of civil strife,
    In youthful eagerness thou didst depart,
      At peril of thy safety, peace, and life,
    To nurse the wounded soldier, swathe the dead,--
      How piercèd soon by fever’s poisoned dart,
    And brought unconscious home, with wildered head,
      Thou ever since, mid languor and dull pain,
    To conquer fortune, cherish kindred dear,
      Hast with great studies vexed a sprightly brain,
    In myriad households kindled love and cheer,
      Ne’er from thyself by Fame’s loud trump beguiled,
    Sounding in this and the farther hemisphere,
      I press thee to my heart as Duty’s faithful child.




Transcriber’s Notes

Italics have been represented by _underlines_. Small capitals have been represented by
CAPITALS.

A period has been added to the name Col. May.

The surname “Meriker” has been corrected to “Nieriker.”

The spelling “Ponkataset” (for “Punkatasset”) has been retained.

The following sentence has been added to the quote on page 17, after
the words “a whirlwind was blowing”: “A long box lay beside the dolls
who stood nearly erect leaning against a pile of papers.” This sentence
comes from _Aunt Jo’s Scrap Bag, Volume 6_, the source of the quote.

A grave accent has been added to the word “piercèd” in the poem on page
58, to match other editions of the work and to better fit the meter.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOUISA MAY ALCOTT, THE CHILDREN'S FRIEND ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


