The Project Gutenberg eBook of The dynasty of Theodosius, or, eighty years' struggle with the barbarians
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The dynasty of Theodosius, or, eighty years' struggle with the barbarians
        A series of lectures delivered to the Durham Ladies' Educational Association

Author: Thomas Hodgkin


        
Release date: June 7, 2026 [eBook #78826]

Language: English

Original publication: Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1889

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78826

Credits: Brian Wilson, Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DYNASTY OF THEODOSIUS, OR, EIGHTY YEARS' STRUGGLE WITH THE BARBARIANS ***




                           DYNASTY OF THEODOSIUS

                                 _HODGKIN_

                                  London
                               HENRY FROWDE

                              [Illustration]

                     OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE
                             AMEN CORNER, E.C.




                                    THE
                           DYNASTY OF THEODOSIUS
                                    OR
                Eighty Years’ Struggle with the Barbarians

                    _A SERIES OF LECTURES DELIVERED TO
                THE DURHAM LADIES’ EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATION_

                                    BY
                              THOMAS HODGKIN
                    _Hon. D.C.L. of Oxford and Durham_
                    AUTHOR OF ‘ITALY AND HER INVADERS’

                                  Oxford
                          AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
                               M.DCCC.LXXXIX

                          [_All rights reserved_]




Dedicated

TO

MY WIFE AND CHILDREN.




PREFACE.


This little book owes its existence to an invitation addressed to me by
the Durham Ladies’ Educational Association to deliver to them a short
course of historical lectures. Being allowed to choose my own subject,
I naturally chose that with which I was most familiar, the epoch of the
fall of the Western Empire: but in order to prevent my very familiarity
with that period from leading me into diffuseness, I took the precaution
of writing the lectures, and thus, I believe, was preserved from in any
case over-passing the prescribed limit of an hour and a quarter.

When my course was completed, I found that I had described in brief
outline so many of the leading events recorded in the first two volumes
of my book, _Italy and her Invaders_, that it seemed worth while to offer
the result of my labours to those who might not care to peruse the larger
work. In order to give a little more completeness to the book, I added a
lecture (the Second) on the political and social condition of the Romans
and barbarians, which was not included in the original course.

It will easily be understood that it is only by the rejection of many
minor details that it is possible to reduce the picture of eighty
eventful years within the limits of a compendium like the present. For
most of these details, and for all discussion of the authorities on
which the history of the period rests, I must refer to my larger work.
Occasionally, however, I have touched upon some points not thoroughly
discussed in _Italy and her Invaders_, and when I have done so, I have
stated my authority in the notes.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

                                LECTURE I.

                            THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

    Limits of the Empire                                               1-7

    Its political organisation—

      The Senate                                                       7-9

      The People                                                      9-13

      The Emperor                                                    13-17

    Periods of Imperial History—

        I. The Julian and Flavian dynasties                             17

       II. The Antonine                                                 18

      III. The Age of Anarchy                                        18-20

       IV. Diocletian: the Age of Restoration                        21-24

           Constantine the Great                                     25-28

           Christianity and the Empire                               28-32

                               LECTURE II.

                        THE ROMAN AND THE TEUTON.

     I. The Roman—

           The Emperor                                               33-37

           The official hierarchy                                    37-44

           Social condition of the Empire                            44-48

           ‘Panem et Circenses’                                         49

           The Slave                                                    50

           The Colonus                                                  51

           The Curialis                                                 52

    II. The Teuton—

           Economic condition of the Germans                         55-60

           German land-system                                        60-62

           Relation of the Village-community to the State            62-65

           The Pagus or Gau                                             65

           Kingship and national unity                               67-70

           The Folc-gemot                                            70-71

           Election of the King                                         72

                               LECTURE III.

                         THE COMING OF THE HUNS.

    German ethnology                                                    73

    The Goths                                                           75

    Ulfilas                                                          77-79

    Athanaric and Fritigern                                          79-80

    Irruption of the Huns                                            80-83

    The Visigoths seek an asylum in the Empire                       86-87

    The Visigoths cross the Danube                                      88

    Roman Emperors: Valentinian, Valens, Gratian                     90-91

    The banquet at Marcianople                                       91-93

    Gothic War: battle of Ad Salices                                    94

    Battle of Hadrianople                                            96-99

                               LECTURE IV.

                               THEODOSIUS.

    The Goths besiege Constantinople                                   101

    Failures of the Goths as besiegers                                 102

    The massacre of the Gothic boy-hostages                            104

    Parentage of Theodosius                                            106

    Theodosius associated in the Empire                                107

    Orthodoxy of Theodosius                                        108-110

    Athanaric at Constantinople                                        111

    The Goths become Foederati                                     113-117

    Insurrection of Antioch                                        117-120

    Insurrection of Thessalonica                                   120-122

    Usurpation of Maximus                                          123-126

    His defeat and death                                               127

    Eugenius and Arbogast                                          128-130

    Battle of the Frigidus                                             131

    Death of Theodosius                                                132

    His character                                                      133

                                LECTURE V.

                                 ALARIC.

    The sons of Theodosius, Arcadius and Honorius                      134

    Their ministers, Rufinus and Stilicho                          135-137

    Alaric chosen King of the Visigoths                                137

    Alaric invades Greece                                              139

    Stilicho forbidden to defend it                                    139

    Murder of Rufinus                                              141-142

    Second campaign of Stilicho against Alaric                         143

    Alaric as Roman governor of Illyricum                              143

    Alaric’s first invasion of Italy                               145-147

    Invasion by Radagaisus                                         148-151

    Revolt of Constantine in Britain                                   152

    Negotiations between Stilicho and Alaric                           153

    Death of Arcadius                                                  155

    Mutiny at Ticinum. Stilicho slain                              156-158

    Alaric’s first siege of Rome                                   159-161

    Alaric’s second siege of Rome                                      162

    Attalus Emperor                                                162-164

    Alaric’s third siege and capture of Rome                       164-166

    Death of Alaric                                                    167

                               LECTURE VI.

                            PLACIDIA: ATTILA.

    Placidia—

           Historical perspective                                      170

           Early life of Placidia: her captivity                       171

           Ataulfus, successor of Alaric                               172

           His marriage with Placidia                                  174

           Death of Ataulfus                                           175

           Second marriage, widowhood, and exile of Placidia           176

           Death of Honorius                                           176

           Rise and fall of Joannes. Valentinian III, Emperor          177

           Regency of Placidia                                         178

           Aetius                                                      179

    Attila—

           Accession of Attila: his character and appearance       180-182

           Extent of his Empire                                    182-184

           His Embassies to Constantinople                             184

           The vases of Sirmium                                        185

           Honoria’s ring                                              185

           Description by Priscus of Attila’s palace                   186

                ”            ”       the banquet                   187-190

           Deaths of Placidia and Theodosius II                        191

           Marcian and Pulcheria reign                                 191

           Attila prepares for war with the West                       192

           Alliance between the Empire and the Visigoths           192-193

           Attila’s invasion of Gaul                                   193

           Siege of Orleans                                            194

           Battle of Châlons (so called)                           195-197

           Attila’s retreat                                            197

           Attila invades Italy                                        198

           Capture of Aquileia                                         198

           The founders of Venice                                      199

           Attila at Milan                                             200

           Embassy of Pope Leo                                         201

           Return and death of Attila                                  202

           The Hunnish power broken                                    203

                               LECTURE VII.

                                GAISERIC.

    Early history of the Vandals                                       204

    The Vandals enter Gaul                                         205-207

    They cross the Pyrenees and enter Spain                            207

    Death of Gunderic: accession of Gaiseric                           209

    Bonifacius invites the Vandals to enter Africa                 209-211

    The Vandals transported to Africa                                  212

    Bonifacius repents and returns to Ravenna                          215

    Siege of Hippo                                                     216

    Capture of Carthage                                                217

    Appearance, character, and career of Gaiseric                  218-220

    Vandal land-settlement                                             220

    Law of succession to the throne                                    221

    Persecution of the Catholics                                   221-225

    Valentinian murders Aetius                                         226

    Death of Valentinian III. Accession of Maximus                     228

    Gaiseric’s Expedition to Rome. Plunder of the City             229-232

    Captivity of the widow and daughters of Valentinian                232

    Further fortunes of the Theodosian family                          233

    Conclusion                                                         234




FAMILY OF VALENTINIAN.

[Emperors of the East are printed in _Italic_ capitals.]


                                           GRATIAN,
                                    of Cibalis in Pannonia.
                                              |
                                +-------------+-------------------+
                                |                                 |
    SEVERA, or      =  VALENTINIAN I,        =   JUSTINA,     _VALENS_,
 Marina (divorced). |    born 321,           |  widow of    born about
                    | proclaimed Emperor     | the usurper  329, Emperor
                    |   364, died 375.       | Magnentius   364, slain
                    |                        |   (he was    at the battle
  A daughter =  GRATIAN,    =   LAETA        | slain 353).  of Hadrianople
  of Emperor  born about 359,  (present with |                  378.
 Constantius  associated with  her mother at |                   |
     II.      his father as    the siege of  |                VALENS,
              Augustus 367,     Rome 408).   |                surnamed
              slain by order                 |                Galata,
              of Maximus 383.                |                born 366,
                                             |                died 371.
                  +----------------+------+--+--------+
                  |                |      |           |
           VALENTINIAN II,       JUSTA.  GRATA.     GALLA,
           born about 371,                         married in
            Emperor 375,                             387 to
           dethroned by Maximus 387,              _THEODOSIUS I_,
           restored 388, slain by                   died 394.
           order of Arbogast 392.                     |
                                                GALLA PLACIDIA.
                                                      |
                                              VALENTINIAN III, &c.




FAMILY OF THEODOSIUS.

[Emperors of the East are printed in _Italic_ capitals.]


                                               |
                              +----------------+----------------+
                              |                                 |
                         THEODOSIUS,                        EUCHERIUS,
                       Magister Equitum                     cons. 381.
                     under Valentinian I,
                   beheaded at Carthage 376.
                              |
                              +---------------------------+
                              |     (387)                 |
             AELIA    = _THEODOSIUS I_, =    GALLA,      HONORIUS,
           FLACCILLA, | b. about 346, | dau. of Emp.  d. in Spain
            d. 386.   |   Emp. 379,   | Valentinian   before his
                      |    d. 395.    |   I, d. 394.   brother’s
                      |               |               accession?
                      |               |                   |
                      |               |                SERENA, = STILICHO,
                      |               |                killed  | killed
                      |               |                 408.   |  408.
                      |               |                        |
                      |               |  +---------+-----------+
                      |               |  |         |           |
                      |               |MARIA  THERMANTIA,  EUCHERIUS,
                      |               | {1}     d. 415.    killed 408.
                      |               |          {2}
                      |               |
                +-----+----------+    +--------------------+   CONSTANTIUS
                |                |                         |         III,
                |        (398)   |  (408)            (414) |    (417) d.
 EUDOXIA, = _ARCADIUS_,  {1} = HONORIUS = {2}   ATAULFUS =  GALLA   =  421.
 dau of   |  b. 377,          b. 384,        K. of the | PLACIDIA,|
 Bauto    | Augustus         Augustus        Visigoths |b. between|
 the      |383, Emp.         393, Emp.  (brother-in-law|388 and   |
 Frank,   |of the East       of West       of Alaric), |393, d.   |
 d. 404.  |395, d. 408.    395, d. 423.     murd. 415. |about 450.|
          |                                            |          |
          |                                       THEODOSIUS, d.  |
          |                                       in infancy.     |
          |                                                       |
          +--------+----------+----------+----------+-------+     |
                   |          |          |          |       |     |
  EUDOCIA   = _THEODOSIUS  FLACCILLA,  _PULCHERIA_  ARCADIA,  MARINA,|
 (Athenais),|  II_, b. 401,  b. 397.    b. 399,   b. 400.   b. 403.|
 dau. of    | Augustus 402,            d. 453.                    |
 Leontius,  |  succeeded               = (451)             +------+---+
 Prof. of   | his father               _MARCIAN_,            |          |
 Rhetoric   | 408, d. 450.             d. 457.             |          |
 at Athens, +--------------------------------+             |          |
 d. 454.                                     |       (PLACIDUS)   HONORIA,
                                          EUDOXIA, = VALENTINIAN  b. 418.
                                           b. 422. | III, b. 419,
                                                   |  Emp. 425,
                     +------------------+----------+ assassinated 455.
                     |                  |
          OLYBRIUS,  =  PLACIDIA,    EUDOXIA, = HUNERIC,
           Emp. 472. |                        | K. of Vandals,
                     |                        | d. 484.
    AREOBINDUS, = JULIANA                  HILDERIC,
    cons. 506.  |                       K. of Vandals,
             OLYBRIUS.                     d. 533.

Transcriber’s Note: Whilst this proves that a complex family tree _can_
be fitted into 75 characters wide, that doesn’t mean that it _should_.
These genealogies are included as illustrations in the HTML version, to
which the reader is recommended to refer.




ERRATA.


    Page 27, line 5 from bottom, _for_ 523 _read_ 323
     ”   91,  ”  16, _for_ get _read_ yet

Transcriber’s Note: The errata have been corrected, although the first
one was printed correctly in the first place and didn’t need to be listed
here.




[Illustration: =Shield of Theodosius=

(_SILVER_)

FOUND NEAR MERIDA IN 1847, NOW IN THE MUSEUM OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL
ACADEMY AT MADRID.

(_Copied from A. Delgado’s ‘Memoria historico-critica sobre el gran disco
di Teodosio,’ Madrid, 1849._)

Theodosius, seated on the central throne, receives from a nobleman
of ‘illustrious’ rank an address, perhaps congratulating him on the
_decennalia_ of Arcadius (393). Arcadius is seated on his right, Honorius
on his left, each attended by two _protectores_ (guardsmen). In the lower
part of the shield is the recumbent figure of Hispania, surrounded by
emblems of prosperity. Above, ‘D(ominus) N(oster) Theodosius Perpet(uus)
Aug(ustus) ob diem felicissimum X.’

  _Hodgkin’s Theodosius._]                        [_Clarendon Press._]




THE DYNASTY OF THEODOSIUS.




LECTURE I.

THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


In Longfellow’s Golden Legend the following question is asked:—

                        ‘Say to me
    What the great Voices Four may be
    That quite across the world do flee
          And are not heard by men?’

and this answer given:—

    ‘The Voice of the Sun in heaven’s dome,
    The Voice of the murmuring of Rome,
    The Voice of a Soul that goeth home,
          And the Angel of the Rain.’

‘The voice of the murmuring of Rome.’ That was indeed a mighty voice; how
all-powerful, how nearly equivalent to the voice of the whole civilised
human race, is more vividly impressed upon us by every year of deeper
study of the history of the world fifteen centuries ago.

[Sidenote: _Extent of the Roman Empire._]

Let us try by a very rapid summary to indicate the meaning which the
words ‘Imperium Romanum’ conveyed to him who heard them in the days when
the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus was still standing and still thronged
with earnest worshippers.

[Sidenote: _North Britain._]

Let us go forth from this city which clusters on its seven hills
around the Tomb of St. Cuthbert. Those hills are untrodden forest or
undistinguished pasture-ground, and all the glory of architecture and
all the wealth of sacred associations which will one day crown them are
unknown, for we are now in the second century after Christ, and Durham is
neither _castra_ nor _mansio_ nor _mutatio_ in the map of Roman Britain.
But if we go a few miles up the Wear, near to that place in ‘the land
of Oaks,’ where the Bishop of Durham will one day build his castle, we
shall find there, upon a high promontory of table-land overlooking the
stream, the spacious camp of Vinovia with its baths and its hypocausts,
doubtless also with its temple and its magazines. Here we strike a great
Roman road. Follow that road northwards over the hills, and you will
come to the camp of Lanchester on the Browney. Another stretch over wild
moorlands, and we reach Ebchester, in the pleasant valley of the Derwent.
Another, and we strike the Tyne at Corstopitum (Corbridge). And so on by
more camps and stations than I need weary you with the names of, till we
reach the great camp, or rather series of camps, which surround the high
altar-like hill of Birrenswark in Dumfriesshire, overlooking the sandy
Solway. Yet still the Roman road is running northwards, till at last it
reaches the Wall of Antoninus, somewhere near the Frith of Clyde.

[Sidenote: _Midland and Southern Britain._]

Southwards the same road pursues its course, uncompromising and
undeviating, over the great ridge of hills which separates you from the
Tees. Across the Swale at Cataractonium it leads us to Isurium, which
will one day be represented by the pleasant old-fashioned village of
Boroughbridge, and where we see for the first time those pictured floors,
the tesselated pavements which are so abundant in Southern Britain and in
Gaul. Then it takes us to Eboracum, the great Roman city of the North,
the home of the Sixth Legion, the place where the aged Severus will lay
down the purple at the bidding of Death, and where the young Constantine
will assume it at the bidding of the soldiery. Thence across the country
south-westwards, over those hills and dales of Yorkshire and Lancashire,
which are now among the poorest and most solitary, as they will one day
be among the richest and the most thickly populated portions of the
island of the Britons. So we reach Deva, or Chester on the Dee, where
the Twentieth Legion have built their stately city, with its temples,
its baths, and its spacious praetorium for their commanding officer. And
so from thence, through Cheshire and Staffordshire, and on by a route
pretty nearly coinciding with that which will, after many centuries, be
taken by the North-Western Railway, till at last we reach that city,
comparatively unimportant in the official map of Roman Britain, but which
the concourse of merchants is even now making important in spite of
prefects and procurators, ‘the city formerly known as Londinium, but now
named Augusta.’

[Sidenote: _Existing traces of Roman occupation._]

In our own day, at nearly every step of our course along this great
highway, which our ancestors named the Watling Street, there is some
trace of the Roman legionary and his sojourn in our island. Here
the coins of some military treasure chest buried in haste and never
reclaimed; there the shells of the oysters or the bones of the beef which
the soldiers consumed; here a dedication to some native god bearing an
uncouth name, with whom they thought it safer to be on friendly terms;
there the pathetic epitaph of a departed wife ‘who lived with her husband
xxx years, “_sine ulla macula_,”’ with no spot upon her goodness; here
the walls of a camp turned by centuries into mere grassy mounds, but
still by their rectangular shape rounded at the corners, showing the
handiwork of the Roman surveyor; there an inscription recording the
rebuilding of a bath or a granary, ‘_vetustate conlapsum_’ (which had
fallen in through age), and reminding us how old and venerable the
buildings erected by the first conquerors of Britain must have appeared
long before the last Roman soldier, standing upon the stern of the
departing vessel, waved his sad ‘_Vale Britannia_’ to our island.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Boundaries of the Roman World._]

All these vestiges of the great world-Empire, when one examines them
patiently day after day, as it has often been my privilege to do in
travelling along one of the great Roman roads in our own country or
abroad, produce an effect upon the mind incomparably stronger and deeper
than results from simply reading the story of the conquest of a province
in the pages of Caesar or Tacitus. And now multiply this picture at
least thirty-fold in order to make it justly represent the whole extent
of the Empire. Cross the sea from ‘Londinium, now Augusta,’ to the
mouth of the Rhine. Travel for days up that stately river and see the
legionaries swarming upon its western, and not unknown upon its eastern
bank. Trace the 300 miles of stake-covered rampart which join the Middle
Rhine to the Middle Danube, and along every mile of which a Roman soldier
is tramping. Descend the Danube from Ratisbon to the Euxine and see every
foot of its right bank held by Rome, who for more than a century holds a
province on the left bank also (the province of Dacia), and stations her
legionaries on the crests of the Carpathian Mountains. Take ship and sail
over the foggy Euxine, and there, in its extreme south-eastern corner,
near where Jason and his companions sought the Golden Fleece, recognise
once more the Roman boundary. Follow that boundary over the mountains of
Armenia to the upper waters of the Tigris. Cross ‘the great river, the
River Euphrates,’ near the place where Eliezer waited for Rebekah by the
well; and then encompassing Damascus and the mysterious cities of Bashan,
let the border come down past the Dead Sea, past Mount Pisgah and Mount
Sinai, and so overleaping the Red Sea, let it reach the valley of the
Nile. Here the frontier towards the barbarism of Ethiopia is the same
that the modern protectors of Egypt have drawn close to the city of Syene
(now Assouan); leaving 800 miles of the rich Nile valley as the granary
of Rome. All along the northern coast of Africa, Cyrene, Tripolis,
Carthage, Numidia, Mauretania, whatever there is of civilised, stable,
wealth-producing life (and it is a broad enough belt in some places)
is all Roman by obedience, and much of it Latin by speech. At last the
boundary goes out at the Atlantic Ocean where Hercules once relieved
Atlas of his load. Men gazing forth upon the waste of waters, and half
discovering, half dreaming, concerning the Fortunate Isles beyond, are
constrained at length to admit the fact that the great Empire has found
its limit, and that if there be other worlds to the West they are worlds
beyond the world of Rome.

[Sidenote: _The Orbis Romanus nearly coincided with the Orbis Terrarum._]

It was an immense extent of territory which the Roman god Terminus thus
marked out, and (as has been often pointed out, but is a fact of the
greatest importance) it more nearly embraced the whole of the then known
and civilised world than any Empire that has since been seen. True, the
mysterious river of Asiatic civilisation, as represented by China and
India, flowed on, not blending its waters with those which the Tiber
ruled. But these countries were practically altogether beyond the horizon
of the Empire. During the first three centuries of our era there was only
one civilised power of which Rome was conscious as a possible rival to
herself, and that was the power of Persia. Her sovereign, whether he were
known as Parthian or Persian, as Arsacid or Sassanid, took to himself
proud titles, calling himself ‘King of Kings,’ and so forth, and often by
his devastating raids inflicted sore disaster on the Eastern provinces
of Rome; but the Empire was certainly far the stronger power, and many
of the abler Emperors could probably, if they had deemed it wise to make
the attempt, have accomplished what Julian so narrowly missed and what
Heraclius triumphantly performed, the overthrow of the Persian monarchy.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Government of the Roman State._]

[Sidenote: _Senatus Populus Que Romanus._]

This vast territory had been acquired by the municipality of an Italian
city under a government which was in some respects the best adapted for
gaining and for consolidating dominion that the world has ever seen.
S.P.Q.R.: these four letters formed the talisman which floated on the
victorious standards of Rome, whether they crowned the misty heights of
the Cheviots or were mirrored in the waters of the Orontes. The Senate
and the People of Rome: we must pause for a few moments on these words to
consider what they implied.

[Sidenote: _The Roman Senate under the Republic._]

(1) The Senate of Rome, in its best days reminding the beholder of an
assembly of Kings, debating the affairs of the Republic with a gravity,
an earnestness and a conciseness very unlike the showy rhetoric of a
Greek _Ecclesia_ or the vapid verbiage of a modern House of Commons or
House of Representatives: this was the body which gave coherence and
unity to the policy of the great Latin city, which prevented it from
being swayed to and fro by such gusts of passion or misplaced sentiment
as ruined the Empire of Athens; which caused it to pursue, century after
century, the same undeviating course, and to act upon the same maxims
of statesmanship—hard maxims often, and inspired by a terrible egotism,
but successful. It was the Senate which enabled the Roman State to feel
the proud confidence that was expressed with less justice by that patient
toiler, Philip of Spain, ‘Time and I against any one else in the world.’

[Sidenote: _Not a mere hereditary aristocracy._]

One source of the Senate’s strength was derived from the fact that it was
never in theory and seldom in practice a mere hereditary aristocracy.
Election to some one of the great offices of the State into which the
kingly power had been divided, Consulship, Praetorship, Quaestorship, was
the door by which entrance was gained into the ‘assembly of Kings’—and
this election in the better days of the Republic implied a certain
amount of popular respect if not of popular favour—but once admitted,
the Senator had his seat practically for life, and needed not to tremble
at every changing wind of popular opinion, lest the withdrawal of the
favour of his constituents should doom him to political annihilation. The
chasm which once separated the Patrician from the Plebeian, and which
made it impossible for the latter to enter the Senate, had been filled
up long before Rome began to play her great part among the nations of
the earth: but it is true that a new aristocracy of consular families,
partly Patrician and partly Plebeian, had arisen on the ruins of the old.
A Terentius Varro, a Marius, a Cicero could by great energy, by military
successes, or by surpassing eloquence, break through into the charmed
circle, but the outcry that was raised at the presumption of such a
_novus homo_ showed that the event was a rare one.

[Sidenote: _The Censorship._]

One institution, however, which modern aristocracies would do well to
copy, tended to save the Senate from the worst perils of a hereditary
oligarchy. To be ruled by a proud nobility which respects itself is
perhaps not pleasant, but it is endurable. But to be ruled by ‘hereditary
legislators’ who do not observe the ordinary decencies of life is an
ignominy too galling to be borne. The power of the _Censor_ to degrade
from his Senatorial office any man who offended against the strict
old-fashioned code of Roman morality, a power which in the best days of
the Republic was wielded with merciless severity and without respect of
persons, must have largely contributed to that moral ascendency of the
Senate which made it for four centuries as supreme in Roman politics as
the House of Commons has been for the last two centuries in the politics
of Britain.

[Sidenote: _The People of Rome._]

(2) The People of Rome, the Quirites, assembled by their centuries,
or their tribes, under an Italian sky, in the Campus Martius or the
Forum—these also had their allotted share in the development of the
greatness of Rome: these formed the strong steadily beating heart,
without which all the accumulated wisdom of the Senate, the brain of
the State, would have been of no avail. Questions of peace and war, and
questions of political reform, were brought before them, generally,
it is true, on the motion of the Senate, but so as to cast the final
responsibility on the people; and during the greater part of the lifetime
of the Republic those solemn trials of political offenders which
correspond most nearly to our own impeachments took place at the bar of
the popular assembly.

[Sidenote: _The Tribunes._]

To guard these rights and to secure the meanest citizen of Rome from
oppression on the part of some haughty aristocrat, the Tribunes of the
Commonalty were called into being, that unique class of magistrates
whose power of ‘intercession’ could bring the whole machinery of the
State to a deadlock, and upon whose ‘sacro-sanct’ persons the proudest
Consul, fresh from victory over the enemies of Rome, might not lay hands
without incurring the penalty of outlawry. The office which the Member
of Parliament has hitherto discharged when he brings the grievance of
a constituent before the House of Commons; the office of redresser of
all wrongs and browbeater of all magistrates, which the Public Press
has of later time arrogated to itself—these offices were for centuries
discharged by the Tribunes of the Commonalty. Upon the whole we may
believe that the Tribunician power was a useful counterpoise to the
immense authority vested in Consuls and Praetors: but it was always a
power which in the hands of a dishonest demagogue might be abused for the
purpose of obstruction. It was always useful only as a brake is useful to
the driver of a railway train; and in the latter days of the Republic
it was a brake suddenly and clumsily applied, by which the Engine of the
State was being continually thrown off the line.

[Sidenote: _Political decline._]

[Sidenote: _B.C. 367-146._]

But, such as they were, these two great depositaries of power, the Senate
and the People, wrought together in reasonable harmony, and upon the
whole for the good of Rome and the fast widening Roman world, during
the two centuries which intervened between the admission of Plebeians
to the Consulate and the Third Punic War. With the fall of Rome’s old
rival, Carthage, a rapid change for the worse manifested itself in the
Roman character. Corruption entered the Senate and brutal violence
disgraced the Assembly of the People. The young Roman politician half
ruined himself over the shows of gladiators and wild beasts that were
to purchase from the commonalty his election to the successive offices
which were the steps in the ladder of his promotion. The mob cheered and
laughed, but the provinces groaned, for out of their plundered cities
and beggared agriculture the Propraetor or Proconsul reckoned to recoup
himself for the heavy entrance-fees which he had paid to gain admission
to the Roman Senate. These abuses became at length too glaring for even
the seared consciences of Roman politicians to endure. Laws against
official extortion, ‘_de repetundis pecuniis_,’ were passed by the
people—a doubtful boon to the provincials, for now the governor robbed
them, not for himself only, but for the rivals and the demagogues whose
silence he had to purchase by bribes. In the train of the governor went
the usurer, lending money at ruinous rates to the provincial to enable
him to pay the clamorous tax-gatherer. Even Brutus, that Puritan among
Roman statesmen, sought to compel the inhabitants of Salamis to pay him
compound interest at the rate of 48 per cent. per annum. Under these
accumulated oppressions the fair countries round the Mediterranean were
fast sinking into misery and despair, the very life-blood being drained
out of them by the insatiable oligarchs of Rome. And during the greater
part of this time, while the Senators were treating the civilised world
as their own private farm, and farming it like a tenant who is under
notice to quit and will get all he can out of the soil, the so-called
People of Rome were every year sinking lower and lower into degradation,
becoming a mere mob of freedmen and foreigners, the collected sewage of
the world. The Constitution—notwithstanding a temporary reaction under
Sulla—was becoming more and more democratic, as the people were becoming
more utterly unworthy to be trusted with power. Armed bands of hired
bravoes fought with one another in the streets of Rome, and on the day of
a hotly-disputed election or the passing of an unpopular law, the statues
in the Forum were splashed with the blood of the slain.

[Sidenote: _Shelley on the decay of Roman freedom._]

I know no words which more vividly bring before our minds the contrast
between the Rome of Cincinnatus and the Rome of Clodius than this verse
from Shelley’s ‘Ode to Liberty’:—

      ‘Then Rome was, and from thy deep bosom, fairest
    Like a wolf-cub, from some Cadmean Maenad
      She drew the milk of greatness, though thy dearest[1]
    From that Elysian food was yet unweanëd.
      And many a deed of terrible uprightness
    By thy sweet love was sanctified,
          And in thy smile and by thy side
          Saintly Camillus lived and firm Atilius[2] died.
    But when blood stained thy robe of vestal whiteness,
      And gold profaned thy Capitolian throne,
    Thou didst desert with spirit-winged lightness
      The Senate of the oppressors: they sank prone
    Slaves of one tyrant: Palatinus sighed
          Faint echoes of Ionian song. That tone
          Thou didst delay to hear, lamenting to disown.’

‘Slaves of one tyrant.’ That was the doom, the righteous doom of the
Roman Senate and People. Corruption above and anarchy below had slain
that Public Virtue without which a Republic cannot live: and now the only
hope of the world lay in the uprising of some one man who should save
Rome from herself, and rescue from her Senate and People the provinces
which they had won but could no longer govern.

[Sidenote: _Caesar._]

This necessary work was performed by the man who stands head and
shoulders above all other statesmen, as Isaiah above all other Prophets,
as Shakespeare above all other Dramatists,—the man whose name still
means Emperor to more than a hundred millions of mankind, GAIUS JULIUS
CAESAR. It may be truly said that the further we get away from Caesar
the Dictator, the greater his work appears. Superficial students of
history used to think of it as only lasting for five centuries (yet
five centuries, the interval of time that separates us from Chaucer and
Wycliffe, is not a contemptible interval in a nation’s life): but the
more scientific school of modern historians rightly claim that the work
of Julius Caesar, the organisation of _Imperium Romanum_, outlived not
only the fall of Rome, but the fall of Constantinople also, and was only
destroyed by ‘the bastard Caesar,’ Napoleon, in 1806, if indeed it be
not, in a sense, living still.

[Sidenote: _Theory of the Principate._]

As the various offices of the Republic had been formed chiefly out of
the power of the ancient kings, it might have seemed the obvious course
to recombine them into one, and crown Caesar king. Warned by the murmurs
of the crowd on the day of the Lupercalia, but also doubtless following
his own instinct as a statesman, Julius—and his nephew Augustus after
him—chose a wiser course. The name of Republic should still remain:
S.P.Q.R. should still be inscribed on the banners of the legions, but
the powers of the Republic should all be grasped in a single hand. There
had been Dictators created for special emergencies: Julius would be a
life-long Dictator. Successful generals had been saluted Imperator by
their soldiers on the field of battle: Julius would be emphatically
_the_ Imperator. Grave and reverend men, the fathers of the Senate, had
been hailed with the title _Princeps_: Augustus would now in middle life
be greeted as Princeps. Above all, the Tribunes of the Commonalty had
possessed enormous powers for the prevention of legislation of which
they disapproved, and their persons had been invested with especial
sanctity. Augustus would now gather into himself all the obstructive
powers of the whole College of Tribunes, and his person should be
‘sacro-sanct’ as theirs had been. Special defenders of the Commonalty
were now no longer needed. The new Imperator claimed, and not altogether
without reason, that _he_ was defender of the people, and therefore each
year by a fresh and solemn act he was ‘invested with the Tribunician
power.’

[Sidenote: _A Monarchy under Republican forms._]

[Sidenote: _Deference of the good Emperors to the Senate._]

[Sidenote: _The bad Emperors delighted in degrading it._]

Our own Constitutional monarchy is often called ‘a Republic veiled under
monarchical forms.’ The Empire of the Caesars was just the reverse: an
absolute monarchy veiled under the forms of a Republic. The analogy may
be carried a little further. Just as every really great and patriotic
Prime Minister, under a Constitutional monarchy like ours, veils somewhat
of the power which in fact is his under the forms of deference to the
throne, and does this not in servile adoration for rank, but because
he knows that in the institution of Monarchy there is a fund of latent
power which it were unwise to squander, and which may one day be sorely
needed for the defence of the life of the nation against enemies from
without or from within, even so the greatest and best of the Roman
Emperors, while holding all power in their hands, used that power as
much as possible in harmony with the Senate and in conformity with the
Senate’s advice; and thus, while preserving the prestige of an ancient
and venerable assembly, also retained in the State a force which might
operate as a counterpoise, though a feeble one, should the vast powers of
the Emperor pass into the keeping of a foolish or wicked successor. But
while the good and patriotic Emperors—Augustus, Trajan, Marcus Aurelius,
Claudius Gothicus, Probus—delighted to magnify the moral authority of the
Senate, the weak and dissolute Emperors, maddened by the possession of
absolute power, delighted to trample upon and insult it. Caligula forced
Senators of the highest rank to walk for miles before his chariot, or to
wait upon him at table, each clad in the linen girdle of a slave. Nero
wrung from the loathing Senate a formal approbation of the murder of his
mother, and insisted on 400 of its members performing as gladiators in
the Amphitheatre. And Domitian, according to the well-known story in the
pages of Juvenal, summoned the trembling Conscript Fathers in the dead of
night to deliberate on the best manner of cooking an enormous turbot.

[Sidenote: _The Provinces were the gainers by the Imperial system._]

But though the Senators groaned under the insults and the cruelty of
the bad Emperors (of whom in the first century of the Empire there was
undoubtedly a terrible preponderance over the good ones) there can be
little doubt that for the Empire at large the change to the Imperial
system was an enormous benefit. The populace of Rome had their rations
and their gladiatorial exhibitions (_panem et circenses_) regularly, and
what was more important, the police and the water supply of the great
City were attended to as they had never been before. The provinces were
no longer exposed to the unchecked cupidity of some dissolute aristocrat,
eager to suck them dry during his short term of office and then to hurry
back to play the great game of politics in Rome. Unjust governors, men
like Pontius Pilate and Felix, undoubtedly still bore sway; but at least
they had as a rule a longer term of office, and less need therefore to
drain the province all at once. And the thought of the terrible Caesar
at Rome, who, however cruel and rapacious himself, was generally quick
to punish cruelty and rapacity in others, the dread of hearing, after
a manifestly unjust sentence, the fateful words pronounced, ‘Provoco
ad Caesarem[3],’ kept many a provincial governor, who may have been at
heart no better than Verres or Gabinius, from shearing the helpless sheep
before him as closely as they would have been shorn in the later days of
the Republic. It is one of the commonplaces of history that even Nero
himself was hated only in Rome, and that after his death the story that
he still lived and would one day return and resume the purple, was told
and lovingly cherished in many of the provinces.

[Sidenote: _Chief periods of Imperial history._]

[Sidenote: _I. the Julian Dynasty, 99 years. (B.C. 31-A.D. 68.)_]

[Sidenote: _The Flavian Dynasty, 27 years. (69-96.)_]

[Sidenote: _II. The Antonines, 84 years. (96-180.)_]

The history of the Empire naturally groups itself into periods, each
of about a century in duration. The Julian dynasty, from the battle of
Actium (B.C. 31) to the death of Nero (A.D. 68), fills up ninety-nine
years. We pass lightly over the twenty-seven years of the Flavian
dynasty (69-96), which is in some respects like a copy of the Julian,
Vespasian being a somewhat commonplace Augustus and Domitian a vulgar
Nero, and we come to the great and glorious age of the Antonines[4]. For
eighty-four years (A.D. 96-180) a series of sovereigns, the best, the
wisest and the most statesmanlike that the world has ever seen—Nerva,
Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus, Marcus—sat upon the throne of the world.
What has been already said as to the happiness of the provinces under
the Julian dynasty might be said without any qualification, as far as
the rulers could bring happiness, of the century of Antonine rule. But
according to the trite quotation—

    ‘How small, of all that human hearts endure,
    That part which laws or kings can cause or cure.’

The course of nature seems as if it had been out of joint during that
otherwise happy century. Destructive earthquakes, wide-wandering
pestilences and grievous famines marked its course; and at the close
of it came that terrible irruption of barbarians from the lands of the
Middle Danube which is known as the Marcomannic War, and which very
nearly brought about the fall of the Roman Empire two centuries too soon.

[Sidenote: _III. The Age of Anarchy, 105 years. (180-285.)_]

[Sidenote: _Debased Coinage._]

The stately and philosophic virtue of the Antonine Emperors led to a
terrible anti-climax—the mad sensuality and cruelty of the bull-necked
Commodus. And now began that terrible third century, in which the great
World-Empire seemed perpetually as if it were on the point of going to
pieces, through its own weakness and corruption, before the barbarians
were ready even to gather up its fragments. It had been discovered ‘that
an emperor could be made elsewhere than in Rome,’ and in every province,
almost in every legionary camp, there was an upstart General eager to
avail himself of this discovery, eager to wrap himself in the purple and
to lay hold of what the Greek historians call ἡ τῶν ὅλων ἀρχή, ‘the rule
of the universe.’ The strongest memory can hardly retain the names of
all the obscure adventurers who thus blossomed into a little temporary
notoriety, and who were murdered by a rival or fell on the field of
battle before their purple had lost the lustre of its newness. Province
thus fighting against province and civil war being the normal condition
of the Empire, the misery and poverty which everywhere prevailed can
hardly be imagined, and are but scantily pourtrayed for us by the
wretched historians of the time. Two things, however, always occur to
my mind as typical of this woeful age—its coinage and its camps. Take a
coin of one of the earlier Emperors, say a bronze sestertius of Domitian,
which lies before me while I write: see the clear bold relief of the
laurel-crowned head, the sharp, well-cut letters of the inscription,
and then compare it with a (so-called) silver denarius of Valerian or
Gallienus—a thin bit of copper with a wash of silver or pewter over it,
and upon it the barbarous effigy of a head wearing a radiated crown and
surrounded by an almost illegible inscription. From a mere glance at the
coins you feel at once that the owner of a sestertius (whose nominal
value was twopence-halfpenny) under Domitian was a richer man than the
owner of a denarius (the equivalent of four sestertii) under Gallienus.

[Sidenote: _Degenerate Architecture._]

And the camps: go to Housesteads or Chesters and see the splendid blocks
of masonry which belong to the age of the Antonines; see the masonry
of a very different and far inferior kind, small and mean and easily
overthrown, which marks the age of Constantine, after the close of the
third century. But in between these two periods of original building and
late repair you may often find a mass of confused _débris_, sometimes
with the marks of fire upon them. That shapeless mound tells the story of
the third century. While every little Tribune or Centurion was coquetting
with the soldiers under his command, relaxing discipline and permitting
plunder, in the hope that they might some morning rush to the Praetorium,
put on him the purple robe and hail him as Imperator, meantime the _Pax
Romana_ was becoming a bitter bye-word over all the Empire, and in our
own country the savage Caledonians were breaking down the barrier of
Hadrian, setting fire to Cilurnum and Borcovicus, swarming across the
Tyne and Tees, and carrying fire and sword far into the heart of Britain.

[Sidenote: _IV. The Age of Restoration, 93 years. (285-378.)_]

The deliverer of the world from this tempest of anarchy and disruption,
the true Second Founder of the Empire was the son of a Dalmatian slave,
Diocletian. As his reign began A.D. 285, as the work of reorganisation
which was commenced by him was continued by Constantine (306-337), and
as the political system thus inaugurated lasted unimpaired till 378, the
date of the battle of Hadrianople, we may call this the fourth century of
the Empire, the period of Restoration.

[Sidenote: _Objects of the Diocletianic reform._]

The great objects aimed at and accomplished by Diocletian were the
increase of the majesty of the Imperial office, the equable diffusion
of defensive power through all parts of the Empire, the welding of a
strong chain of rights and responsibilities which should vibrate from the
Emperor on his throne to the lowest official in the most distant province.

[Sidenote: _Increased veneration for the Imperial dignity._]

(1) The increased majesty of the Emperor’s office. All pretence of his
being only the first citizen in a Republic, only the most eminent member
of the Senate, and so on, was now done away with. The Emperor now wore
on his head a pearl-bordered diadem, on his feet sandals studded with
gems; he was surrounded by a splendid retinue, and the petitioner who
approached him—though he were a member of one of the proudest families
in the Roman Senate—had to prostrate himself on the ground and _adore_
the Imperial Majesty. Thus at length the Roman Imperator stood fully
revealed, a monarch as haughty and as absolute as Darius or Sapor. In all
this, censorious critics traced the overweening pride of the Dalmatian
slave’s son exalted to the pinnacle of earthly greatness: yet it is
probable that policy had as much share as pride in the self-exaltation
of Diocletian. During the long troubles of the third century, when every
legion was making and unmaking Emperors, the highest office in the
State had lost all dignity and all prestige: and if it was really to
recover itself and become, as Diocletian would have it, the true centre
of gravity of the State, it was necessary that it should once again
seem awful and majestic. The same statesmanlike spirit which dictated
to Augustus the suppression of the visible signs of regal magnificence,
suggested to Diocletian their multiplication and embellishment.

[Sidenote: _Division of labour._]

(2) It had become manifest to a statesman’s eye that the vast Roman world
could no longer be ruled from Rome alone. On the Rhine, on the Danube,
on the Euphrates, strong armies were required to guard the frontiers:
yet it was precisely from these armies, strangers to the Imperial city
and to the person of the legitimate Augustus, that the brood of usurpers
and tyrants, claimants for the Imperial purple, was being perpetually
recruited. Diocletian now carved out the Roman Empire into four great
Prefectures, each large enough to satisfy the ambition of a Charles V or
a Louis XIV, and gave to each of these Prefectures its own court, its own
capital, its own elaborately organised official hierarchy.

[Sidenote: _The four Prefectures._]

I. ‘The Gauls,’ comprising Britain, Gaul, Spain, and part of Morocco,
and reaching from the Firth of Clyde to Mount Atlas, had its centre of
government at Augusta Trevirorum (Trier on the Moselle).

II. ‘Italy,’ comprising Raetia, Italy, Sicily, and the wealthy provinces
of Africa, was still in theory governed from Rome; but practically its
Emperor during the whole of the fourth century was generally resident at
Mediolanum (Milan).

III. Illyricum, the smallest of the four Prefectures, included the
provinces of the Middle Danube, the western portion of the country lately
known as Turkey in Europe, and Greece. Sirmium on the Save was generally
the residence of its Emperor.

IV. All the rest of the Empire formed the rich and important Prefecture
of the East (Oriens). Its Emperor for the most part resided at Antioch,
from whence he watched the ever menacing attitude of the Sassanid kings
of Persia.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Transmission of the Imperial power._]

[Sidenote: _Abdication of Diocletian, 305._]

[Sidenote: _Death of Constantius. Elevation of Constantine, 25 July,
306._]

The great scheme of Imperial government matured by the brain of
Diocletian, provided not only for the exercise but also for the
transmission of power. The adoptive system, which had given to the Empire
all the noblest sovereigns of the Antonine period, was to be revived in
all its vigour. Two Emperors ruling as Augusti were to adopt two younger
colleagues as their sons, who were to bear the humbler title of Caesar,
and were to administer those Prefectures in which the danger of war was
the keenest, and the labour of ruling the most severe. As in the course
of nature the two senior partners, the Augusti, moved off the scene,
the Caesars were to take their place and adopt two new Caesars to ease
them of their burden, and one day inherit their dignity. An elaborate
and ingenious scheme, and one which might conceivably have preserved
the Empire from civil war at least for two or three generations, but
which in fact was broken to pieces by that longing after the hereditary
transmission of power and wealth which is one of the deepest instincts of
humanity. Diocletian and Maximian (a brave, uncultivated soldier) were
the two first Augusti: Constantius and Galerius the two first Caesars.
After a prosperous reign of twenty years, enfeebled health and perhaps a
desire to see with his own eyes the success of his great design, induced
Diocletian voluntarily to resign the purple, and Maximian, who had no
such philosophical inclinations and who was still in the lusty vigour
of middle life, was compelled to follow the example of his patron. Thus
did Constantius and Galerius become the two new Augusti, but Galerius,
who was the son-in-law and special confidant of Diocletian, had the
choice of the two new Caesars, and chose a nephew and a dependent of
his own, Maximin Daza and Severus, neither of them really fitted for
‘the rule of all things.’ Constantius, a man of mild and gentle temper,
away in distant Britain and already smitten by disease, acquiesced in
the nominations of his self-seeking partner; but the offspring and the
soldiers of Constantius rebelled against an arrangement so one-sided
and inequitable. Constantine, the brave young son of Constantius by his
concubine Helena, now in his thirty-second year, was at Nicomedia in
Bithynia when Diocletian’s abdication threw the direction of the affairs
of the Imperial partnership into the hands of Galerius, who viewed
him with no friendly eye, and would fain have kept him in honourable
captivity in Asia. Repeated letters from his colleague Constantius
at length wrung from him the required permission for the young man’s
departure, and Constantine, according to a well-known story, starting
on the long journey across Thrace by the Danube and the Rhine, caused
the horses at the first few Imperial post-stations to be hamstrung, in
order to prevent any courier from overtaking him with a revocation of
the order. He reached York in safety; he made a successful campaign in
Caledonia under his father’s auspices, and when that father returned to
York to die, the legionaries, led by a Teutonic chief Crocus, king of the
Alamanni, who held high command among them, insisted with one voice, that
the diadem and the purple of the deceased Emperor should adorn his noble
son, and that whatever the new-fangled constitution of Diocletian might
prescribe, his title should be not Caesar but Augustus. Of the myriads
of travellers who hurry to and fro through the magnificent railway
station of York, how few find time to visit the admirable museum of Roman
antiquities which is within a few hundred yards of the station, to gaze
upon the ‘multangular tower’ with its courses of square Roman bricks,
and in thought to retrace the history of York, Eoforwic, Eboracum, up to
that day when the shouting soldiery, enraptured with the donative which
each man had received, acclaimed the young hero ‘Constantine Imperator
tu vincas.’ Strange is it to reflect that then what we call ‘the Eternal
Eastern Question’ had no existence, since he who was to give his name to
Constantinople was only setting his foot on the first rung of the ladder
of power, and the Bosphorus, with the inconsiderable city of Byzantium on
its shores, was still a silent and solitary water-way, while Eboracum was
making and unmaking Emperors.

[Sidenote: _Confusion and Civil War._]

[Sidenote: _Suicide of Diocletian, 313._]

By the elevation of Constantine to the Imperial dignity—an elevation
which Galerius found himself eventually forced to consent to—the whole
of Diocletian’s elaborate scheme of adoption, partnership and succession
was shattered into atoms. The son of Maximian, Maxentius, followed the
example of the son of Constantius and declared himself Augustus. Then
old Maximian himself resumed the purple. In the year 308 there were six
Emperors reigning at once, all styling themselves Augusti. Civil war in
such conditions as these became the chronic condition of the Empire. The
fable of the armed men who sprang from the dragon’s teeth sown by Cadmus,
and who fought with one another all the long summer’s day till only five
were left, became a terrible truth. Such was the scene, such the utter
failure of his grand project for promoting the peace of the Empire upon
which the weary eyes of Diocletian closed, when, seeking refuge in death
from the indignities which his young successors would have put upon him,
he passed away from earth in his stately palace by the Adriatic, that
palace which in the Middle Ages became a city[5].

[Sidenote: _Constantine and Licinius, 315._]

[Sidenote: _Constantine sole ruler, 323._]

Of the dragon’s brood of combatants, at the time of the death of
Diocletian only two were left, Constantine in the West and Licinius in
the East. A short civil war was terminated by an apparent reconciliation
between the two kinsmen (Licinius had married the sister of Constantine),
and for eight years Licinius seemed to be satisfied with an arrangement
which left him only the Eastern quarter of the Roman world, while the
Gauls, Italy and Illyricum obeyed his more fortunate and far abler rival.
But

    ‘Never could true reconcilement grow,
    Where wounds of deadly hate had pierced so deep.’

The terrible loneliness of those who climb to the high places of power,
their incapacity of tolerating a rival near the throne produced the usual
results, and in 323 the second civil war broke out. Over land and sea
the two mighty storm-clouds moved with terrific momentum against one
another. Thirty-four thousand men fell on the hardly-contested field of
Hadrianople. Crispus, the brave young son of Constantine, forced the
passage of the Dardanelles and laid siege to Byzantium. The final battle
was fought in September, 323, at Chrysopolis in Bithynia. Licinius was
defeated after a most bloody encounter, in which 25,000 of his followers
were slain. He implored and seemed to receive the pardon of his ‘Emperor
and Master’ Constantine, but in the following year, on some suspicion of
conspiracy, was put to death. Seventeen years after his being proclaimed
at York, Constantine was sole and absolute master of the Roman world.

[Sidenote: _Christianity and the Empire. (303-313.)_]

The generation which witnessed the break-down of Diocletian’s scheme of
adoptive succession witnessed also the final triumph of Christianity
over its persecutors. By a somewhat undeserved fate, the name of the
great restorer of the Empire has been handed down to after ages as that
of the fiercest and most cruel of the oppressors of the Church. The
persecution of the Christians which was commenced under Diocletian, and
which continued, with some intermission, for the two last years of his
reign and till the eighth year after his abdication, was not apparently
originated by him, but by his younger and infinitely less statesmanlike
colleague Galerius, who obtained the sanction indeed, but not the hearty
co-operation of the aged and now valetudinarian Emperor. Still it must
be admitted that Diocletian, though no fanatical adorer of the Olympian
gods, believed in the necessity, on political grounds, of one great and
relentless struggle for the suppression of the ‘new and illicit religion’
which had grown up in the bosom of the Roman State, and which, as all men
of clear insight perceived, must either conquer it or be conquered by it.

[Sidenote: _Constantine’s attitude towards Christianity._]

The same purely political instinct which made Diocletian persecute,
led Constantine to foster and favour the Christian Church. Could we
penetrate the secrets of the hearts of these two men, we might find
that their religious convictions were not very dissimilar. Both were
probably at heart Monotheists, both had that belief in a just and
overruling Providence, which comes to most men who are in authority, and
who, seeing the endless labour and contrivance which is needed in an
earthly ruler to keep his world in any degree of order and peace, cannot
easily persuade themselves that the whole of this fair system of things
which we see around us came by chance. It may be doubted whether, in
his heart of hearts, Diocletian went much beyond this position in his
worship of Jupiter, or Constantine—at any rate till near the close of
his life—in his belief in Christ. But the younger Emperor saw clearly
that no fresh attempt to extirpate Christianity by force could succeed
when Diocletian had failed; that the new religion made of its votaries
not only better men, but, upon the whole, better citizens and more loyal
subjects; that it possessed a force which, wisely guided, might be used
for the preservation and not for the disruption of the Empire; above all,
that the zealous partisanship of Christian bishops and priests would
be a far more valuable ally to him in the desperate strife with his
competitors—first with Maxentius and then with Licinius—than the languid
half-hearted acquiescence of the Pagans in the religion which was a
fashion rather than a faith, handed down to them from their forefathers.

Thus, then, the alliance of Constantine with the Christian Church was
formed, that alliance of which the imposing Council of Nicaea, consisting
of 318 bishops, presided over by the great Augustus himself, glorious
in purple and gold, was the most conspicuous seal and symbol. But though
Constantine fostered, and, if I may so say, petted the Christian Church,
he did not bring about that complete and intimate union of the State and
the Church which was to be the distinguishing mark of the later, and
pre-eminently of the Eastern Empire. Christian ideas indeed coloured
much of his legislation. An edict was passed for the observance of ‘the
Saviour’s day, the day of Light and of the Sun;’ and the soldiers, even
those who did not profess Christianity, were enjoined to meet on that day
in some open space near the city in which they were quartered and to lift
up their hands to heaven thanking God for past victories, and imploring
Him long to preserve in safety and triumph their Emperor Constantine
and his pious sons. Every attempt to compel Christians to be present
at idolatrous sacrifices was rigorously forbidden. The more licentious
of the heathen orgies were forcibly suppressed. Many idol temples were
thrown open to the gaze of the vulgar, and some were stripped of their
treasures and their revenues for the benefit of the Imperial Treasury.

Still there was no formal renunciation of the worship of the gods of the
Capitol—no formal recognition of Christianity as _the_ religion of the
Empire. The temples, though in some cases robbed of their gold and silver
ornaments, remained standing; nay, even in the new and Christian capital,
in Constantinople itself, new temples were erected, of course not
without the Emperor’s cognisance, to Rhea, to the Great Twin Brethren,
to the Fortune of the New Rome.

[Sidenote: _Religious policy of Constantine’s successors._]

Two generations passed after the foundation of Constantinople, during
which the relation of the Empire to the Christian Church was the central
question of all politics. These were the years during which the strife
between Athanasian and Arian was being waged in all its bitterness, and
the influence of Constantius, the survivor of the sons of Constantine,
and eventually the sole ruler of the Roman Empire, was thrown with
passionate earnestness on the side of the Arians, on whose behalf he
exerted a severity which sometimes amounted to actual persecution of
their opponents. Then came the short and fruitless attempt of Julian
to restore the worship of the old gods. After his death followed some
further struggles with Arianism, which could again boast the protection
of an Eastern Emperor[6]. All these events tended to bring the
supreme civil power more and more deeply into the innermost circle of
ecclesiastical politics. Men’s minds became familiarised with the idea of
one supreme and triumphant form of the Christian faith, professed by the
Emperor, inscribed on the forefront of the State, and rigorously imposed
on all citizens as an essential condition of their citizenship. This
consummation was reached under that Emperor whose fortunes I shall before
long have to describe to you, under Theodosius, who proclaimed the final
triumph of the Athanasian faith, commanded all his subjects to adhere
to it, prohibited the meetings of heretics, destroyed the temples of the
gods, and made orthodox Christianity, what it continued for more than a
thousand years, the State religion of the Roman Empire.




LECTURE II.

THE ROMAN AND THE TEUTON.


_Comparison of the Political and Social Condition of the Empire and its
German Neighbours._


§ 1. THE ROMAN.

Before I proceed to describe the collision between the Roman Empire and
its Northern neighbours, I wish to sketch, in rapid outline, the chief
features of the political and social condition of these two worlds, so
close to one another in geographical position, so far removed from one
another in the stages of their respective development.

[Sidenote: _The Imperial Majesty._]

We saw something in the last lecture of the process by which the Roman
Augustus had grown to be what he was, the man with the mightiest
opportunities for good or for evil of any on the surface of our planet.
Let us now look for a few minutes at the outward presentation of this
greatness to the eyes of his subjects. If we enter the Imperial palace
and pass the first veil which guards the ante-chamber of the sovereign
we find ourselves at length before a second veil, in front of which
are watching thirty _Silentiarii_ in brightly burnished helmet and
breastplate, defending the ‘Silence’ of the innermost sanctuary from any
rude intrusion. Without the favour of some ‘illustrious’ functionary
there would be for us but little hope of entrance into that august
seclusion: but we who have travelled back over fifteen centuries of time
can push aside the spectral _Silentiarius_ who would forbid our entrance,
and can gaze, without the humiliating ceremony of prostration (exacted
from all his contemporary subjects), upon the face and figure of the
dread Augustus. He has perhaps just returned from the amphitheatre, and
wears therefore the full robes of royalty in which he displays himself on
state occasions to his subjects. On his head is the diadem, a broad white
band studded with two rows of pearls, and with an emerald or a carbuncle
blazing in the centre. Jewelled ear-rings hang down on either side of his
face. Over his shoulders is hung a purple robe, richly embroidered with
gold, similar to the _vestis picta_ which a conquering general used to
wear in old times when he was drawn in triumph to the Capitol. The use of
that purple colour is now jealously reserved to the Emperor himself, the
members of the Imperial family, the Consuls, and a few of the most highly
placed officers of state. For any ordinary subject to wear it would be
an act of _laesa majestas_ (high treason). More than once has a Roman
citizen lost his life, simply because a purple robe has been found in his
possession. Upon his feet the Emperor wears sandals of the same purple
dye, and these also are richly studded with jewels.

In the midst of all this pomp, though sleek eunuchs and brilliantly
dressed pages are moving obsequiously through the chamber, eager to
anticipate the slightest wish of their master, the Lord of the Universe
does not present the outward show of happiness. There is a look of
weariness and anxiety in his face, dark lines under his eyes; languor and
satiety in the very tones of his voice. Though there are some exceptions
to the rule, the Augustus, since the changes introduced by Diocletian,
leads generally an indoor life, unfavourable to health. He does not take
those long and varied journeys which filled up the life of Hadrian: he
does not, except in dire necessity, march at the head of his troops like
Trajan: he does not even drive chariots and contend for prizes in the
theatre like Nero. He has now to keep himself aloof from his subjects
in dignified seclusion: his chief business in life is to be worshipped:
and the life of an idol must, as it seems to us, be always a tedious
life. The one thing that varies the monotony of the slowly-pacing days
is fear—that fear which, even under this new and more settled order of
things, no Emperor can wholly banish from his mind—that in some camp of
misty Britain, or by the mob of some Syrian city, a rival Augustus may
be suddenly acclaimed, and that it may be necessary to struggle not for
dominion only but for bare life against the desperate antagonist.

[Sidenote: _Deification of the Emperor._]

The being who dwelt in this stately seclusion was not only raised to the
ranks of the gods after his death (‘_Divus_’ being the regular official
prefix of the name of a deceased Emperor): he was occasionally even
addressed as ‘_Deus Noster_,’ ‘our God,’ during his life. ‘_Dominus
Noster_,’ ‘our Lord’ or ‘our Master,’ was, however, his more usual
title, this appellation which the modesty of Augustus had waived (since,
as he said, it implied that those who used it were his slaves) having
been freely accepted, and then jealously claimed, by his successors of
the Lower Empire. Everything belonging to the Emperor was habitually,
and without any trace of irony, spoken of as ‘Sacred.’ The ‘sacred
bedchamber’ meant the Emperor’s bedroom: the ‘sacred largesses,’ the
Imperial subscription-list. ‘Our Mildness,’ ‘our Tranquillity,’ ‘our
Clemency,’ are the terms which the Emperors generally use when they
are speaking of themselves, though occasionally we find an Emperor
soaring even to higher regions of august self-contemplation and speaking
of himself as ‘my Eternity[7].’ This reverential mode of speaking of
the Emperor’s dignity by no means disappeared with the adoption of
Christianity. A writer on military affairs, who was probably contemporary
with Theodosius[8], says of the oath taken by the army: ‘The soldiers
swear by God and Christ and the Holy Spirit, and by the Majesty of
the Emperor, which, according to the will of God, is to be loved and
worshipped by the human race. For when the Emperor has received the name
of Augustus, faithful devotion is to be rendered, life-long service is
to be paid, to him as to God present in a human body[9]. For that man,
whether soldier or civilian, serves God who faithfully loves him who
reigns by God’s ordinance.’

[Sidenote: _The Imperial Consistory._]

In one of the apartments of the palace was assembled the _Consistory_ of
the Emperor, a body somewhat resembling our Privy Council, and consisting
of all the highest officials of the State. From this Consistory now went
forth all laws, addressed in the Emperor’s name to some great functionary
charged to see to their execution. Here, too, were announced the names
of those persons whom the Emperor nominated to the highest places in the
civil and military service. All this legislative and administrative work,
which in the days of the Republic had required the concurrence of the
Senate and People of Rome, and a large share of which had been left even
by Augustus and Tiberius to the Senate, was now done by the mere _fiat_
of the Emperor; and only slight traces of even a theoretical right of
confirmation by the Senate, none at all of such a right of confirmation
by the People, seem to have been preserved.

[Sidenote: _Three classes in the Imperial hierarchy._]

The officials, civil and military, by whom the work of ruling the vast
Roman Empire was carried on, were divided into three great classes:—

1. The _Illustres_, nearly corresponding to our Cabinet Ministers and
Commander-in-Chief.

2. The _Spectabiles_, whose rank was not unlike that of our Privy
Councillors, and who included most of the governors of provinces and
military officers of rank.

3. The _Clarissimi_. This title was given to all Senators, and was also
shared by some of the governors of provinces of inferior rank, and
subordinate commissioned officers.

[Sidenote: _The Notitia._]

The various degrees and orders of this great official hierarchy were
accurately described in a treatise called the _Notitia Utriusque
Imperii_, which, there is some reason to think, was written up by
each Emperor afresh on his accession to the throne. This document is
illustrated by somewhat grotesque pictures, emblematic of the contents
of the various chapters, which may have been drawn by the unskilful
fingers of the Imperial scribe. The copies of the _Notitia_ which we
possess describe the state of things existing about the beginning of the
fifth century, and bring before us in a wonderful manner the various
and skilfully contrived channels by which, in theory at least, the
great Imperial power flowed down to, and was brought in contact with,
the meanest of its subjects. The first chapter enumerates all the chief
officers of the Eastern Empire. The second takes up the office of the
PRAETORIAN PREFECT, greatest of all the Illustres, a man who, after his
office had undergone great mutations, had at length become, so to speak,
the Grand Vizier of the Emperor, his _alter ego_ and vicegerent, the
official who took as much as possible of the drudgery of ruling off the
shoulders of a monarch, who, if ill-disposed, wanted to take his fill of
luxury and sensual enjoyment, or if earnest to perform the duties of his
station, was generally busy on the frontier, warring with the barbarians.

Though the scheme of Diocletian for ‘adoptive succession, and
partnership’ had broken down, his skilful division of the vast spaces of
the Empire still endured, and each one of the four Prefectures founded by
him was still under the rule of its own special Praetorian Prefect. This
second chapter, then, of the _Notitia_ describes the various provincial
governors, who are, in its phrase, ‘under the disposition’ of the
Illustrious Praetorian Prefect of the East. Then follows an enumeration
of the official staff—the registrars, the shorthand-writers, the
process-servers, the beadles, the gaolers who were employed in the court
of the Praetorian Prefect, himself not merely a great Minister of State,
but also the highest Judge of Appeal, Premier, and Lord Chancellor in one.

[Sidenote: _Magister Militiae._]

[Sidenote: _Probable size of the Imperial army._]

Another chapter of the _Notitia_ gives the emblems of the dignity of
the Illustrious MASTER OF THE SOLDIERY in the East, and enumerates
the various legions which were under his disposition. And here we are
brought face to face with the interesting question, What was the size
of the Roman army at the time when its greatest struggle with the
barbarians began? Unfortunately the _Notitia_, though it gives us much
detailed information as to the disposition of various bodies of infantry
and cavalry, does not enable us to give a definite answer to this
question; and unfortunately also an impression has been produced, one
can hardly tell how, that by this time the Legion, the well-known unit
of computation in the Roman army, had been formally reduced from its old
strength of 6100 men to about 1000. Of course this suggestion throws
all calculations as to the size of the army, derived from the number of
legions contained in it, into confusion. But as no proof of this formal
reduction of the legion has yet been offered, I prefer to take it at its
old valuation: and so doing, I come to the conclusion that the Roman army
at the end of the fourth century consisted on paper of at least 950,000
men[10]. To deduce from this its actual effective strength can be only
a matter of conjecture; but my conjecture would be that fully one-half
of the above number, or 475,000 men, were at that time serving under the
banners of the Empire[11].

[Sidenote: _Praepositus Sacri Cubiculi._]

If I am not wearying you, we will turn over a few more pages of this
wonderful handbook, which I have often in my own mind compared to a
_Whitaker’s Almanack_ and an _Army List_ for the fifth century after
Christ, bound up together. Even that comparison hardly does justice to
the _Notitia_. I doubt if we have any book which in our own country shows
so clearly and so concisely the relations of the various departments of
our State to one another (for instance, of the Exchequer to the Treasury,
or of the Privy Council to the Poor Law Board) as this treatise shows
the functions of the great officers of the Roman State and the classes
of civil servants over whom they bore sway. After the Master of the
Soldiery, that is, the Commander-in-Chief, we come to the Illustrious
Grand Chamberlain, or, as he was called in the high-flown language of
the Court, the SUPERINTENDENT OF THE SACRED CUBICLE. Our MSS. of the
_Notitia_ are defective in the chapters relating to this magnificent
personage, but we know from other sources that he ruled over an army of
pages, scullions, keepers of the wardrobe, grooms of the bedchamber, and
the like, and that the thirty gleaming _Silentiarii_ who watched outside
the purple veil took their orders from him.

[Sidenote: _Magister Officiorum_.]

The Illustrious MASTER OF THE OFFICES is next described. In a quaint
picture are represented the emblems of his rank, a table with the
likeness of the Emperor standing upon it, and underneath shields,
spears, greaves and helmets. We learn from the text that the arsenals
of the Empire, the Postal Service, the four great bureaux[12] which
were responsible for the Imperial correspondence and for receiving and
answering petitions, the swarm of King’s Messengers (as they would now
be called) or _Agentes in Rebus_, who rode up and down through the
provinces, executing the orders of the Sovereign, were all under the
disposition of this hard-worked and useful functionary.

[Sidenote: _Quaestor._]

The Illustrious QUAESTOR was responsible for the preparation of the
Emperor’s Edicts, and seems to have shared with the Master of the Offices
the duty of replying to the humble petitions of his subjects. A bundle
of these petitions and a box, which looks like a pillar post-office,
inscribed ‘Leges Salutares,’ appear on his page of the _Notitia_ among
the emblems of the Quaestor’s dignity.

[Sidenote: _Comes Sacrarum Largitionum._]

[Sidenote: _Comes Privatarum Rerum._]

The Illustrious COUNT OF THE SACRED LARGESSES and COUNT OF THE
PRIVATE DOMAINS were the two great financial ministers of the State.
Theoretically the first might have been expected to discharge only the
duties of a Grand Almoner, in supervising the Imperial Charities.
Practically, however, he had to superintend the collection of revenue
from Illyrian silver mines and Egyptian corn-fields, from the
manufacturers of linen, and the traders in salt. The Count of the Private
Domains similarly superintended the vast estates belonging to the Crown
in the various provinces of the Empire, defended them from squatters,
urged the claims of his sovereign to the land of a subject dying without
natural heirs, and received the reports of the stud-masters who watched
over the troops of horses reared for the Emperor in the plains of Thrace
and Cappadocia. The pictures denoting the functions of these two officers
are nearly alike, both representing money-chests, sacks fat with gold and
silver, and great bowls filled with round masses of bullion.

[Sidenote: _Merits and defects of the Imperial Bureaucracy._]

Such is a very brief outline of the system of civil and military
administration as arranged by Diocletian and Constantine. This
Bureaucracy (I know no pure English word which expresses the idea)
carried on the government of the Eastern Empire for more than a thousand
years. It had great faults—it was grasping, repressive, too often
corrupt. At the beginning of the fifth century, if we may believe a poet
of the Opposition[13], an Eunuch, who by Imperial favour had climbed up
into the high place of Praetorian Prefect, dared to open an auction mart
in his private chamber for the actual sale of provincial governorships to
the highest bidder. And even where there was not positive corruption,
there can be little doubt that the rule of the Byzantine officials was
generally impoverishing and exhausting to the provinces, paying but
little heed to their just complaints, and bent on screwing out of them
the uttermost farthing for the Emperor, if not for the officials’ own
private benefit. Still the officialism of the Empire had some great
merits, without which it could never have subsisted so long as it did.
The regular gradation of offices, the scientific division of powers, the
career opened by the civil service to intellect, irrespective of noble
birth or warlike prowess—all these things made of the administrative
hierarchy of the Roman Empire a great engine of civilisation in those dim
mediaeval centuries, and one which contrasted favourably in many respects
with the rough barbaric forces that were everywhere else struggling for
supremacy. If the student wishes to know how it was that the Empire of
Constantine, notwithstanding all its degeneracy, lasted on in the East
for 1120 years, let him study that curious and interesting document, the
_Notitia Imperii_.

[Sidenote: _Social condition of the Empire._]

Passing from the political, I will make a few remarks on the social state
of the Empire in the fourth century after Christ. Our information on this
subject is very imperfect. We have no authors who, like the comedians
of Athens, or like Horace and Juvenal in Rome, enable us to reconstruct
a picture of the manners and customs of those far-off times, almost as
vivid as is furnished by the Miss Austens and the Anthony Trollopes of
the nineteenth century. Still we have something. Ammianus Marcellinus,
the great historian of Julian and Valentinian, possessed the eye and
hand of a satirist; and St. Jerome, even in denouncing the vices of
fashionable society in Rome, brings us into nearer acquaintance with its
good as well as its evil qualities.

[Sidenote: _Division between classes._]

Taking a broad survey, we may say that the characteristic of Roman social
life in the later Empire, was the gulf (a far wider and more bridgeless
gulf than exists in our own day) between the very rich and the very
poor. The Roman did not take naturally either to manufacturing or to
retail shop-keeping. He was (perhaps I should rather say, he had been)
essentially a warrior. The rich Roman was still lawyer, civil servant,
money-lender, and land owner. The poor Roman was tiller of the soil—often
under very hard conditions—or else ‘loafer’ (no other word will express
my meaning) in the cities. What was true of the dweller in Rome was true
also to some extent of the Romanised population of the provinces. Now,
if we consider what these statements amount to, and if we consider also
the invariable influence of slavery in crushing out the better class of
free artisans, we shall see that we have here a society from which the
middle class and the more independent portion of the lower class are
perpetually tending to disappear; in other words, a society composed of
the very rich and of the _employés_ of the State at one end, and of the
proletariat[14] at the other, with only weak and insufficient padding
between.

[Sidenote: _Roman fortunes._]

We have some interesting information as to the fortunes of wealthy
Romans about the year 420, after the distress caused by the invasion
of the barbarians had begun. In the first families in Rome it was not
unusual for the master of the household to have an income of £160,000 a
year, besides the produce of vineyards and corn-lands, which was worth
quite £50,000 more[15]. Wealthy families of the second class were worth
from £40,000 to £60,000 a year. A Senator named Probus, when his son
was made Praetor about 423, spent £48,000 on the shows which it was
still customary for that functionary to exhibit to the people. Some
fifteen years before, ere Rome had yet been taken by the barbarians,
Symmachus the orator, a man who was deemed to possess only a moderate
fortune, had spent £80,000 on similar exhibitions; while Maximus, who
was considered one of the very rich citizens of Rome, lavished £160,000
upon the festivities, which, notwithstanding this prodigious expenditure,
only lasted seven days. At this time the palace of every Roman nobleman
had spacious baths, forum, hippodrome, fountains, temples (or churches)
within its enclosure, so that a stranger visiting Rome cried out with
enthusiasm

    ‘Every house is a town, Rome holds a myriad of cities.’

St. Jerome tells us that the devout lady Paula, who claimed descent on
the paternal side from Agamemnon, and on the maternal from the Scipios,
was possessed of vast wealth, and that the whole city of Nicopolis
(founded by Augustus to commemorate the battle of Actium) belonged to her
alone.

[Sidenote: _Habits of wealthy Romans._]

The men who owned these enormous fortunes seemed to Ammianus to be for
the most part cold-hearted and effeminate dandies, unworthy of the
great name of Rome, whose foremost citizens they were. A lofty chariot
would be one man’s sign of distinction, another covered himself with a
multitude of cloaks of finest silken texture, each one fastened round
his neck by a jewelled clasp, and perpetually wriggled his body about
or waved his hand in order to call the attention of the bystanders to
the gay fringes of his robe or the figures of animals embroidered upon
it in divers colours of needle-work. Others strutted along the street
followed by a whole army of retainers, and when they entered the public
baths attended by at least fifty slaves, at once began to shout out in a
voice that was meant to strike awe into all humbler visitors, ‘Where are
my people?’ A contemptuous toss of the head was all that they vouchsafed
to an acquaintance; to the fawning flatterer who was hungering for their
smile they would contemptuously offer a hand or a knee to kiss. But all
this affectation of aristocratic _hauteur_ vanished when some woman of
doubtful reputation drew near, or when news was brought to them of the
arrival of some fresh horses or charioteers of extraordinary skill. The
banquet was to these men a time of dull and solemn sensuality. When the
panting slave placed on the table a fish or a turkey of unusual size,
they would send for the scales and order it to be weighed, and then one
of the crowd of hungry secretaries standing by would be called upon to
record the prodigy on his tablets. Beyond this kind of employment for the
pen, their ideas either of literature or of science hardly soared.

[Sidenote: _The poorer citizens of Rome._]

[Sidenote: _Bread distribution._]

Thus empty and frivolous appeared to a contemporary satirist the lives of
the Roman nobility. Of the lives of the poorer citizens he gives us fewer
details, but we can see that for them as for their ancestors the interest
of life was summed up in three words ‘_Panem et Circenses_’—bread and
circus-shows. By a well-understood bargain between the Roman mob and
the Roman Emperor—a bargain which lasted through all the centuries from
Julius to Augustulus—he was bound to provide them with at least food
enough to keep them from starving, and with a proper amount of excitement
in the form of games, chariot races, and fights of gladiators and
wild beasts; and if he failed in this, the first duty of a ruler, his
diadem and his life were both forfeit. The elaborate provisions of the
Theodosian code enable us to understand how the duty of feeding the mob
was performed. We see the householders of Rome seated on broad flights
of stairs throughout the fourteen regions of the City, and receiving
from the slaves who obeyed the orders of the Superintendent of Supply
(_Praefectus Annonae_) their loaves of fine wheaten flour, each weighing
about a pound and a half[16], and in addition, a certain quantity of oil.

[Sidenote: _Games._]

And then as to the games. The history of Ammianus and the letters of
Cassiodorus show us these same unemployed citizens flocking to the
stately Colosseum, or the spacious Hippodrome, and shouting themselves
hoarse with the name of some favourite gladiator or charioteer. The
chariot races especially, stirred the people to a frenzy of excitement,
surpassing that of a contested election or an Irish faction-fight. The
two colours, blue and green, flaunted by one set of charioteers or the
other, stirred the citizens both of Rome and Constantinople to the very
madness of triumph or disappointment. ‘The green charioteer flashes by:
part of the people is in despair. The blue gets ahead: a larger part
of the city is in misery. They cheer frantically when they have gained
nothing: they are cut to the heart when they have received no loss: and
they plunge with as much eagerness into these empty contests as if the
whole welfare of the imperilled fatherland was at stake[17].’

[Sidenote: _Slave-system._]

In such a round of ignoble excitements, in such an attitude of
dishonourable dependence on the feeding power of the State—pauperism
disguised under high-sounding names—the mob of Rome and of
Constantinople, apparently also of Antioch and Alexandria, spent their
lazy lives. Meanwhile the agricultural population and the inhabitants of
the smaller provincial towns were daily sinking lower into the gulf of
hopeless poverty, toiling, yet scarce able with all their labour to keep
famine from their doors. At the base of the social pyramid were of course
to be found the Slaves, those unhappy beings who, shut up at night in the
huge and gloomy _ergastula_ (slave-barracks), worked all day under the
hot Italian sun, cultivating the land of some wealthy master, unknown,
unseen, only represented by a hard, relentless _villicus_ (steward),
himself a slave, but delighting to make the more miserable creatures
under him feel his power. These were the kind of establishments which, a
hundred years or more before the Republic fell, had replaced the happy
home-steads of the Latin or Sabine farmer: and it was the sight of this
spreading plague-spot of servile agriculture which in the first century
of the Christian era forced from Pliny the well-known cry of lamentation,
‘Large estates have been the ruin of Italy and are now causing the ruin
of the provinces[18].’ Yet perhaps in the fifth century the slave was not
the most miserable of the rural inhabitants. Christianity had already
introduced some betterment into his condition. The _ergastulum_ was
prohibited by law, if we may not think that it had entirely disappeared
in fact: and decrees were beginning to be issued, earnestly protesting
against that breaking up of families which is one of the most cruel
characteristics of predial slavery[19]. And at any rate the slave, in all
ordinary circumstances, was safe from death by starvation, a security
which was not always enjoyed by his social superiors.

[Sidenote: _Coloni._]

Next above the slave, and often hardly to be distinguished from him,
was the _colonus_ or serf, a man over whom his lord had no power of
life and death, but who was bound—as were his children after him—to
cultivate a particular piece of ground for the owner, at a rent which
seems to have been practically unchanged from generation to generation.
He had therefore no power of changing his condition nor of choosing a
better landlord, but on the other hand he had practically a kind of
tenant-right which he transmitted, with the corresponding liability,
to his children. This class of compulsory cultivators seems to have
sprung out of freeholders who were weighed down by hopeless debt, and
who by process of law became _coloni_ of their creditors[20]; but it
was probably enormously increased during the troubles of the third and
fourth centuries, when men finding freedom with starvation a burden too
heavy to be borne, voluntarily lowered their condition, and becoming
_coloni_ accepted the helping but degrading hand of a _dominus_. In times
of peace and plenty the condition of a _colonus_, notwithstanding his
bounded horizon and his depressing round of unvarying toil, was perhaps
not altogether to be pitied: but war, famine, and pestilence must have
terribly reduced his narrow margin of profit.

[Sidenote: _Curiales._]

Of all classes of the community, however, none seem to me so truly to
be commiserated as the _curiales_, the vestrymen and town-councillors
of the provinces. These were the descendants of the men by whom the
local self-government of the Empire had formerly been carried on, the
representatives of a once flourishing and happy middle class. Their
ancestors had been men of importance in their little world, and the
letters D E C (for Decurio, or town-councillor) carved on their tombs had
shown their right to a coveted dignity. But as they bore rule in their
little commonwealth, so they were responsible for its contributions to
the public revenue; and as the Empire grew older, as it became divided,
as there came to be three or four Imperial Courts to support instead of
one, and as heavier sums had to be paid to buy off or to fight off the
barbarians, so the pressure of the tax-gatherer became more severe, while
the privileges of the town-councillor became more shadowy. At last the
truth was openly confessed: the _curialis_ was a mere bond-slave of the
Empire, bound to fulfil his ‘curial obligations,’ that is, to bear an
ever-increasing burden of local rates and imperial taxes, transmitting
this sad necessity to his children, compelled if the land next to him
fell out of cultivation to take it up and cultivate it for the benefit of
the Imperial Treasury, forbidden to become a priest or even a slave, lest
by either process he might escape from his bondage to the _curia_. One or
two ways of escape from this bitter servitude were indeed left open, but
they were narrow, thorny, and difficult. Practically the chief liberator
of the _curialis_ and his kindest friend was Death.

The sketch which I have thus offered you of the social condition of the
Empire in the fourth century is certainly a gloomy one. Like all such
sketches it can only be approximately true. Doubtless there were at Rome
many nobles unlike the effeminate dandies whom Ammianus has described
to us: doubtless there was in the provinces many a cultivator of the
soil, whether _colonus_ or _curialis_, who glided happily enough through
life, not crushed by the burdens and the despairs which seem to us so
terrible. Yes: though I cannot accept the proposition that the sum of
human happiness is a constant quantity throughout the centuries, I doubt
not that in the saddest periods of the history of the world there has
been more individual happiness, and in the happiest of such periods more
individual suffering, than the historian pourtrays to us. But upon the
whole we may confidently say that the Roman World, at the time when the
barbarian invasion began in earnest, was not happy or flourishing. Large
tracts of land within the _Limes Imperii_ were going out of cultivation,
population both in Italy and the provinces was dwindling, and I think
Hope was unusually absent from the hearts and minds of men. In short, the
Empire was sinking under the weight of its official administration, even
as I fear that after ages will see that many fair states of Europe are
now sinking under the weight of the terrible armaments with which mutual
suspicion has led them to array themselves.


§ 2. THE TEUTON.

From the highly-developed life of the Empire, with its signs of
exhaustion and decay, we turn to that of our German forefathers and
their kindred—a life rough, untrained, undisciplined, but already
utterly different from that of mere savages, and bearing within it the
seeds of many noble institutions. The German peoples (to speak of them
in the language of Rome), the _Deutsche_ (as they have in more recent
times called themselves), or the Teutonic[21] race (which is the term
now generally used in contrast to Celts and Slaves), occupied, broadly
speaking, the territory from the Rhine to the Danube, and along the
northern shore of the Danube to the Black Sea. There were settlements,
however, of the Teutons on the west of the Rhine, and in the east of
Europe Sclavonic nations were mingled with Teutons in a confusion which
it is now impossible to disentangle. Of their ethnological relations,
however, I shall have a little more to say in my next lecture. At present
my object is to give a slight sketch of the inner life of these Teutonic
peoples, in its social and political aspects.

[Sidenote: _The Germans at the end of the first century after Christ not
a nomadic people._]

The first detailed information that we possess as to the customs of
the Germans is given us by Julius Caesar, who describes the state of
things which prevailed about 55 years before Christ. Our next and by
far our fullest information comes from Tacitus, who wrote his priceless
monograph, the _Germania_, in 98 A.D., that is, about a century and a
half after Caesar. During that interval it is clear that an important
change had come over the habits of the Germans. From being a pastoral
people, living chiefly on milk and cheese and the flesh of their cattle,
they had become, to a large extent, tillers of the soil. They still
kept their flocks and herds, and wealth among them was still measured
chiefly by these possessions; but bread was now a staple article of
food, and perhaps that upon which the slaves and the poorer freemen
chiefly subsisted. This change in diet involved a necessary change in
the habits of the people. The shepherd and the herdsman are essentially
wanderers; the varied needs of their dumb companions in winter and
summer, make frequent change of abode not only easy but profitable,
while the agriculturist of course must remain stationary to watch the
growth of the corn which he has sown. It seems probable that Caesar’s
conquest of Gaul, Tiberius’s victories in Switzerland and the Tyrol,
and the strong restraining hand of Augustus upon all the tribes beyond
the Rhine and the Danube, were partly the cause of this change in the
habits of the Germans. Cooped within narrower limits, and no longer able
to overrun at their pleasure the fair lands of Gaul and Pannonia, they
betook themselves of necessity to a more careful cultivation of their
restricted territory, and practised the arts of a rude husbandry—rude
indeed, but incomparably less wasteful of the earth’s resources than the
nomadic life of the grazier and the sheep-master. In its turn this change
in their habits reacted on their character. It made the maintenance of
peace between them and the Empire possible for two or three generations
at a time, and it so far fixed the bounds of the habitations of the
Germanic peoples themselves, that the map of Germany which is drawn to
illustrate the text of Tacitus will serve, without many changes, for the
distribution of the tribes in the time of Constantine.

[Sidenote: _A German village-settlement._]

Let us try to understand what the life of these German farmers looked
like in a time of peace during the second and third centuries of the
Christian era. Their settlements, like those of a Canadian backwoodsman,
were for the most part clearings in the midst of ‘the forest primeval.’
Here, then, with a girdle of woodland round them, was planted the cluster
of scattered houses which made up the village. The Romans called it a
_vicus_, the modern Germans call it a _dorf_ (a word akin to our own
_thorp_); our Saxon and Anglian ancestors called it sometimes a _ton_[22]
(town), sometimes a _ham_[23]; while their Danish invaders gave to the
same kind of settlement the name of a _by_ or a _wick_[24]. The houses
in the German village were built of timber, and if Tacitus is correct in
saying that tiles were unknown among them, we must, I suppose, conclude
that the straw thatches which are still common in rural England were
the roofs chiefly used by our German ancestors. One feature of a German
village which struck the eye of a Roman observer, and in which it
probably differed even from a Celtic town, was that there were in it no
rows of contiguous houses. Each dwelling, whether large or small, stood
surrounded by its own plot of ground, and thus fires were less dangerous
than where the lines of buildings were continuous. The description of
such a _vicus_ given by Tacitus reminds one of a Swiss village, say
Meyringen, Grindelwald, or Altdorf, if we can imagine all the changes
which have been wrought therein by the tide of summer tourists done away.
And the great belt of woodland which seems always to have surrounded the
German _vicus_, and which was to a certain extent the common property
of the villagers, who possessed rights of collecting fuel, and probably
also of hunting game in these encircling forests, reminds me of several
modern German villages which I have seen, but especially of Schwalbach,
which is environed by just such a belt of trees, chiefly beech-trees. In
this beautiful green girdle, which is from one to two miles in depth,
the poor of the village are still employed during the winter in felling
and carrying wood for the benefit of the _Gemeinde_, and the wages paid
to them for this work seem to supply the place of what is called with us
‘out-door relief.’

[Sidenote: _Distinction of classes in a German village._]

In these little sequestered villages the bulk of the German warriors had
their homes. There was a distinction of classes among them. Then, as
now, the German looked upon noble birth with reverence, and probably in
every village there were at least one or two heads of families called
noble, and believed to be sprung in far-distant ages from the seed of
gods. But the largest and most important class was that of the men,
free but not noble[25], who took part in all public assemblies, and who
formed the bone and muscle of the national army, but who, though proud
and independent, did not look upon themselves as eligible for any of
the highest places in the State. Among these, however, there were all
sorts of gradations of rank, depending partly on personal qualities,
but largely also on their relative wealth. The chief outward sign of
this wealth was cattle, so much so that the earliest translator of
the New Testament into a Teutonic tongue coined a word equivalent to
‘cattle-hoarder[26],’ when he wished to warn his readers against the
‘mammon of unrighteousness.’ But slaves also were possessed, probably
in considerable numbers, by wealthy German villagers, though they were
employed almost entirely in the labour of the farm and the pasture, all
domestic work being as a rule performed by the female members of even the
rich German family. Half-naked, and far from clean, the children of the
master and of the slave sprawled about together on the floor of either
home, until the years of manhood were reached, when it was deemed fitting
that some distinctive dress should show the difference of their rank. But
it was in these smoky huts, on these dirty floors, and doubtless also
in many a long day’s chase along with the slave-boys in the encircling
forest, that the fair limbs of the young German warriors grew to that
size and that sinewy stateliness which, as Tacitus admits, were the
admiration and the terror of Rome.

[Sidenote: _Land-system of the Germans._]

[27]The agriculture of these Teutonic tribes was conducted in a manner
which necessarily kept it in a backward and primitive state. Apparently
the Germans had learnt the lesson that frequent grain-crops exhaust the
fertility of the soil. Anything like a scientific system of manuring, in
order to repair that exhausted fertility, was of course yet undiscovered;
but a rude provision for fallows seems to have been generally made.
Periodically, the whole population of the village went forth into the
adjacent country and decided upon the portion of pasture or moorland
which was to be broken up by the plough in order to replace the portion
of arable land which had earned the right to repose. The new corn-land
thus created was divided among the villagers, not equally, but according
to their rank and wealth, chiefly because rank and wealth implied a
proportionate power of cultivation[28]. While the poor freeman, who was
only just above the rank of a slave, could bring only his own arms and
those of his sons to till the little patch of ground which was allotted
to him, his wealthy neighbour, who had slaves and horses and herds in
abundance, could cultivate, and therefore might insist upon having
allotted to him, a much larger part of the new corn-land. Thus, by this
arrangement, as by so many of those which belong to a more complicated
civilisation, ‘to him that had, more was given, so that he had
abundance.’ After all, every German village had still so much land at its
disposal, that few heartburnings seem to have been caused on the score of
too scanty allotment[29]. And in order to prevent the complaint that one
villager received a more fertile or a sunnier portion than another, the
lots periodically[30], perhaps even annually, changed hands, though still
on the same principle of unequal division.

At first sight, such a system as this appears communistic, but on
reflexion we see that the right of property, and the inequalities which
flow from the acknowledgment of that right, are fully recognised by it.
Only I think we must admit—and here the words both of Caesar[31] and
Tacitus seem to justify our conclusion—that there was in the minds of
the rough German politicians of the first century before and the first
century after Christ, a conviction, or perhaps rather an instinct, that
the land, though still cheap and not much more an object of desire than
water or air, was, like water and air, essential to the nation’s life;
and that, though cottages and the surrounding gardens were the subject
of absolute property, and descended from father to son without question,
it was safer for the community by frequent changes to prevent the right
of any one of its members to a given space of corn-land or meadow from
becoming firm and immovable.

How these open fields were probably divided into strips, or ‘yard-lands’;
how the villagers sometimes helped one another in the necessary
ploughing; how some traces of this peculiar kind of joint occupation
existed through the Middle Ages, and were still manifest in our own
country even in the early part of this century, has been set forth with
much fulness of detail by my friend Mr. Seebohm, in his interesting book,
_The English Village Community_[32].

[Sidenote: _Indolence of the Germans._]

Whatever other advantages this system might possess, it was not likely
to encourage highly-developed agriculture. But indeed, from the account
given by Tacitus, which is generally confirmed by later historians,
it is clear that the German freemen, though far from being the squalid
savages that they have been sometimes represented, were not industrious
tillers of the soil. War, the chase, the sword-dance, and the throw of
the dice-box were their chief excitements, and when they were not excited
they were torpid and lethargic. Long and heavy potations, sometimes
continued for a day and night together, sometimes interrupted by a bloody
brawl, were followed by equally long and heavy slumbers. Whether they
went to the banquet or to market they always wore arms, a sure sign of
a low state of civilisation; and the gravest affairs were all discussed
amid copious draughts of beer, or, if the disputants dwelt near the
Rhine or the Danube, of wine from the land of the Romans. In short,
while we can trace in the Teuton of the first Christian centuries some
noble qualities—truth, courage, chastity—we also discover the marks
of some deep inbred vices, which beset him till this day, especially
drunkenness and the love of gambling; and we do _not_ find even the
germs of that capacity for steady and continuous toil which, since they
became Christian and civilised, has been the glory of the German, the
Anglo-Saxon, and the Scandinavian.

[Sidenote: _How the village community developed into the state._]

Such, then, in brief outline, seems to have been the ordinary life of a
German village. The political institutions of the Teutonic races—which
are what we are chiefly now concerned with—depended on the manner and
extent of the consolidation of these villages into larger and more
powerful communities. If we go up to some high table-land we shall see
little brooks and streams running off from it in all directions, some
of which will perhaps eventually form part of a great and world-famous
river, while others will find their way unnoticed to the sea. In studying
the early history of the Germanic tribes, we stand on such a table-land.
The future fortunes of Franks, Visigoths, Burgundians, Angles,
Saxons, are involved in the village politics of these much-drinking,
freely-fighting German boors; but there are also involved the obscure
destinies of countless little tribes, whose uncouth names survive only in
the pages of Tacitus or Jordanes, and are in fact forgotten by men.

[Sidenote: _Manifoldness of German political life._]

The characteristic of German polity, as much in the first century after
Christ as in the sixteenth, as much in the time of Arminius as in that
of Charles V, was its infinite diversity. There were tribes that knew
no king, tribes that had kings with very limited powers, tribes that
submitted to despotism—or something very like it—on the part of their
kings, and tribes that even endured to have such authority over them
exercised by a woman. And the chief—I will not say the only—cause of this
diversity seems to have been the relative greatness or littleness of the
clusters into which the village communities ultimately coalesced; and,
closely connected herewith, the question whether the organism which was
thus finally formed entertained widely extended schemes of aggression and
foreign conquest, or whether it rested content with the defence of its
own narrow borders against an invading foe.

[Sidenote: _The Pagus, Gau, County or Canton._]

Apparently every German village, at the time which we are now
considering, had so far coalesced with some of its neighbours as to
form what the Romans called a _pagus_. The extent of these _pagi_, and
the number of _vici_ which united to form them, doubtless differed
exceedingly, but as we find that in the time of Caesar[33] each Suevic
_pagus_ sent forth 1000 armed men, an equal number remaining at home
to till the ground, we may perhaps assume that the whole population of
a _pagus_ generally consisted of about 10,000 persons, and that about
ten _vici_, more or less, contributed to its formation. The choice of a
Teutonic word to represent the term _pagus_, which, though convenient, is
foreign, has not been found easy. Modern German scholars have generally
adopted the word _Gau_, which was extensively used in the Middle Ages,
though it is admitted that this does not precisely correspond to the
_pagus_, but was often of somewhat smaller extent. As an English
equivalent, _county_ or _shire_ comes the nearest, though both of them
suggest ideas of a somewhat later time[34]. Whether such a translation
be scientifically accurate or not[35] there can be little doubt that
the feeling of local patriotism which still animates a Devonshire man
or a Shropshire man when he speaks of his county, represents, at least
as well as any other modern equivalent, the bond which bound a German
warrior to his _pagus_. But, upon the whole, the Swiss _canton_, both in
extent and in the manner of its growth, namely, by the coalition of the
inhabitants of several neighbouring valleys, seems to me the most fitting
representative of the _pagus_ of the _Germania_.

Some German communities, perhaps, stopped in the process of consolidation
at the canton, and never reached a further stage. They may have had
traditions, and even religious rites, which kept alive the remembrance
that they formed part of a larger tribe, that they were Suevi, or
Mattiaci, or Chauci; but as far as political organisation went they were
willing to be a _pagus_ and nothing more. If so, we may probably affirm
that the tribes which contained many of these self-isolated cantons
retained what has been called their ‘republican’ organisation, engaged
but little in offensive war, were feeble in their resistance to Rome, and
have left but little mark in history.

[Sidenote: _Several Pagi might coalesce into a Civitas._]

The first step towards national existence on a larger scale was taken
when many _pagi_, bound together for the most part by the traditions
of a common origin, organised themselves into what the Romans called a
_civitas_, and in doing so generally, perhaps not always, elected for
themselves a King. I do not think it is possible to find a term which
exactly represents the stage of development which was thus reached, but
the Saxon and Anglian kingdoms which were set up in our own land—Wessex,
Mercia, Northumbria—will convey the true idea of it to our minds better
than an elaborate description.

[Sidenote: _Kingship and tendency towards unification went together._]

Kingship and a tendency towards unification went hand in hand in the
history of the German races. And not in that history alone: we may safely
illustrate the tendency of the kingly office among the Germans by what we
read in the Old Testament of the election of Saul. The Twelve Tribes of
Israel, conscious that they were losing national unity and were in danger
of being absorbed by the great monarchies on their borders, elected Saul
to be their king, and his very first act of kingship was the deliverance
of the outlying settlement of Jabesh-gilead from the destruction with
which it was threatened by Nahash, King of the Ammonites. In our own
days we have seen the aspirations of the Germans after national unity,
aspirations which seemed for centuries doomed to hopeless failure, at
length successful; and the visible token of their success and of that
victory over their foes which unity made possible, was the crowning of
the Emperor William by a host of kings, dukes and generals[36], in the
palace of Versailles. We must not press the conclusion too far, since the
history both of Rome and of the United States of America shows that a
Republic can found a great dominion and defend the oneness of a nation:
but for the German peoples, properly so called, I think we may safely say
Monarchy has meant Unity, and Unity has meant Monarchy.

[Sidenote: _Character of the kingly office among the Germans._]

Far other, however, than the languid despot upon the sanctity of whose
presence-chamber we intruded in the beginning of this lecture, was the
King of the Goths or the Alamanni. Whether himself the son of a king or
not, it was necessary that he should be of noble birth[37], and he had
therefore probably been reared in a house, rude but somewhat larger than
the ordinary freeman’s dwelling, built by the side of a fountain or near
a sacred grove, at some little distance from the village settlement[38].
But his life had been passed in the active exercises of war and the
chase: and before he was chosen king of a great and important _civitas_
he had probably given some proof of valour and ability, to cause him to
be singled out from the ranks of nobles, each of whom was a chief in
his own canton. Even after his election as king, his power was by no
means unlimited. He might not bind nor strike any one of the free German
warriors under him. Both in council and in war he had so much authority
as his gifts of intellect, of daring, or of strength enabled him to
acquire and retain, and not much more[39]. And when thus elected he had
no absolute right to transmit his crown to his first-born, nor indeed to
any of his sons. Doubtless the eldest son of a recently deceased king,
if himself a man of capacity and valour, had always a good chance of
being chosen to succeed him, but that was all. Gradually as the nation
and its royal race grew accustomed to one another, and especially when
the kings of that race had often led the nation to victory, the feeling
grew stronger and stronger that out of that race only the nation ought to
choose its kings. Thus were the Amals looked upon as the natural kingly
race of the Ostrogoths, the Merwings of the Franks, the Asdings of the
Vandals. But still there was no strict hereditary right, and the nation
on the death of its king exercised its power of choice often in utter
defiance of the rule of primogeniture.

[Sidenote: _Meeting of the members of the Civitas._]

The choice of the ruler, the decision as to war or peace, the enactment
of a few very simple laws, these formed the chief business of the
assembly of the _civitas_, which was called probably by some name like
our own Anglo-Saxon Folc-gemot or Folcs-thing. Tacitus gives us a
concise but vivid picture of the proceedings of one of these national
assemblies. The _gemots-men_ indicated their deep-seated love of liberty
by the unpunctuality of their attendance. Two days, and sometimes three,
would elapse before a sufficient number had arrived to enable them to
commence their proceedings. Then, when the crowd was in the humour for
beginning, they sat down on the ground, all arrayed in their armour. The
priests called for silence, and upon them rested the duty of maintaining
order during the deliberations of the assembly[40]. Then the king or
chief whose age, or eloquence, or noble birth gave him the right of
pre-audience, addressed the assembly, and afterwards each in his turn
according to the same blended qualifications. All the speakers sought
rather to persuade than to command. An unpopular proposal was drowned in
murmurs of disapproval, while eagerly brandished lances testified the
applause and the agreement of the assembly.

[Sidenote: _Judicial power of the popular assembly._]

In these assemblies an accusation might be brought against a man who
was suspected of treason against the nation’s life, and if the charge
were pushed home, a capital sentence was pronounced upon the offender.
Betrayers and deserters were hanged from a tree; the mere coward and
fugitive, the man whom our Saxon forefathers would have called a
_nithing_, was plunged deep in mud and covered with a hurdle to prevent
his struggling back to life—a mode of punishment which reminds one of
some scenes in Dante’s _Inferno_.

[Sidenote: _Election of the King._]

Probably, however, it was neither the legislative nor the judicial,
but the elective aspect of these national councils which was the most
important. The chiefs, or elders, or judges, or by whatever name they
were called, the men whose business it was to administer a rude justice
in the cantons and the villages, were chosen in the national council[41].
And the highest act of the nation’s great assize was performed when the
chief who was to repel the eagles of Rome, to lead the people across the
frozen Danube, or to swoop upon the wealthy plains of Gaul, was solemnly
chosen king. The clashing arms testified the nation’s assent to his
nomination. Six strong warriors slowly upheaved the shield on which stood
the newly-chosen one, and shouts of ‘Thiudans! Thiudans[42]!’ proclaimed
to the echoing hills that the nation had once more a king. Thus was he
singled out from his fellows who was to conduct the people’s quarrel with
the far-off, mysterious, Imperator of Rome.




LECTURE III.

THE COMING OF THE HUNS.


Having thus given a cursory glance at the political and social condition
of the Roman Empire and its German neighbours in the fourth century after
Christ, let us now even more briefly survey the ethnological aspect of
the barbarian world on its northern frontier at the same time.

[Sidenote: _Celtic nations._]

[Sidenote: _Slavonic nations._]

Of the three great groups into which the non-Latin nations of Europe are
at this day divided, Celtic, Teutonic, and Slavonic, the Teutonic alone
here claims our especial attention. The Celtic nationality had been
beaten down in ten years of battle by Julius Caesar, and its last hope of
offering a successful resistance to Rome vanished when Suetonius Paulinus
crossed the straits of Menai and put the Druids to the sword in their
hitherto inviolable island of Mona. The Slavonic group of nations, which
now fills Russia and Poland, forms half the population of Austria and is
founding new kingdoms and principalities in what was lately Turkey in
Europe, had not then come fully on the stage of history. The vague term
Sarmatians, used by Roman geographers, is probably the best indication
that we have of their presence in Europe, but few ethnological questions
are harder than to define the ever-shifting boundary which separated
them from their Teutonic neighbours. It is very possible that many of
the barbarian hosts that warred on Rome may have consisted of Slavonic
marauders led on by Teutonic chieftains: but just because the initiative
at any rate belonged to the Teutons, and because the Slaves originated so
few expeditions against the Empire, we may practically leave them out of
the question and consider only the great Teutonic population which, all
round the northern frontier of the Empire, from the mouth of the Rhine
to the mouth of the Danube, faced the Masters of the Soldiery and their
Legions.

[Sidenote: _Tendency of the Teutonic nations to form confederacies._]

[Sidenote: _Franks._]

[Sidenote: _Alamanni._]

[Sidenote: _Goths._]

There had been a marked tendency during the third century after Christ in
the barbarian nations to merge themselves into a few great confederacies,
a tendency which possibly had something to do with the ill-success of the
Roman arms during that period. A whole string of names of petty tribes
on the lower Rhine, mentioned to us by Tacitus, disappears in order to
form the nation of the _Franks_. In like manner the tribes which dwelt
on the Main and the Neckar clustered together into the confederation of
the _Alamanni_. On the Middle Danube the great nation of the Marcomanni,
who once pressed Marcus Aurelius hard, disappeared, and no one nation
of pre-eminent power arose in its place; but when we come towards the
mouth of the Danube, to the countries which are now known as Roumania,
Transylvania, and Bessarabia, we find them occupied by the great and
powerful confederacy of the _Goths_. This race, of pure Teutonic origin,
belonging to that which is called the Low-German family of peoples, and
speaking a language much more akin to Lowland Scotch than to the modern
German of Hanover, had migrated, probably in the second century of our
era, from the district now known as East Prussia in the south-east corner
of the Baltic. They had spread themselves along the northern shore of
the Euxine, near the mouths of the Dnieper and the Dniester, and after a
series of piratical expeditions by sea and marauding inroads by land upon
the Eastern half of the Empire, had occupied without further opposition
the Roman province of Dacia, constituted by Trajan in the early part of
the second century. During the century before our narrative begins, they
had been dwelling for the most part as friendly and peaceable neighbours
of Rome. They had become gradually divided into two great groups of
peoples, the Eastern and Western Goths, who eventually became known as
the Ostrogoths and Visigoths.

[Sidenote: _Associations connected with the term Gothic._]

A hard and undeserved fate, as well as an unmerited glory, has come upon
the possessors of the Gothic name. The glory is that of having given
their name to the most solemn and impressive order of architecture that
the world has ever seen. Men speak, and doubtless will ever continue to
speak, of Gothic buildings, though the last traces of Gothic nationality
had expired many centuries before a pointed arch was seen at Canterbury
or Notre Dame. On the other hand the expression ‘What a Goth!’ as
indicative of rudeness and lack of culture, is constantly used by the
descendants of men who were centuries behind the Goths in refinement
and civilisation, and who do not know that ‘What a Frank!’ or ‘What a
Saxon!’ would be far nearer to historic truth. In point of fact, of all
the Teutonic races none showed so early an appreciation of what was
best in Roman civilisation as the Gothic, none showed a greater power
of assimilating that civilisation, and none, had its career not been
prematurely cut short, would more happily for Europe have blended the old
with the new by uniting the culture and refinement of ‘Romania’ with the
rough energy and freedom of ‘Barbaricum.’

[Sidenote: _The Visigoths and the Empire._]

[Sidenote: _Circa 350-376._]

At the particular period which we have reached these remarks apply rather
to the Visigoth than to the Ostrogoth. While the Ostrogoths, wandering
wide over the vast plains of Southern Russia, were coming in contact
with and subduing the dim Slavonic peoples of the interior, and thus
building up for their great king, Hermanric, a vast but ill-consolidated
empire which his flatterers—those of them at least who had some slight
knowledge of classical history—compared to that of Alexander the Great,
the Visigoths dwelling in Transylvania and Wallachia, and acknowledging
perhaps in a general way the suzerainty of Hermanric, but under the
especial rule of their own native chieftains who bore the subordinate
title of _Judges_, were continually coming more and more under the
influence of the Empire. Latin and Greek words were creeping into their
language. The soldier talked of his pay as _mizdo_ (evidently the same
word as the Greek μισθός), and of his rations as _anno_ (probably the
Latin _annona_). The _alewa_ displayed to the grateful husbandman the
fatness of the olive-tree, and he carried home its produce in a _sakkus_.

[Sidenote: _Ulfilas and the Gothic Bible._]

[Sidenote: _348-370._]

Not only words like these and a knowledge of the arts of civilised
life, but more far-reaching thoughts, those which overleap the grave
and bind together in one all the generations of the family of God, were
vibrating through the Visigothic brain. Ulfilas, the great Apostle of the
Goths, himself a Goth, but resident in early manhood at Constantinople,
began his missionary career in 341, and continued it for forty years,
labouring during all that time by his tongue and pen at the conversion
of his countrymen to Christianity. As an instrument in this great work
he translated the Bible into Gothic, only omitting, according to the
well-known story, the books of Samuel and Kings, ‘inasmuch as they
contain the story of the wars, and the Gothic race was already fond
enough of war, and needed rather a bit to hold it back from battle,
than any spur to urge it thereunto.’ This Gothic Bible is a priceless
possession for the philologist, being by far the earliest monument of
any Teutonic language, and illustrating in a countless variety of ways,
both the distant relationship which connects our family of languages with
Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin, and the points at which the members of our
own family, German, Danish, Dutch, English, have parted company one from
another.

[Sidenote: _Persecution of Gothic Christians. 370-375._]

The success of Ulfilas in Christianising the Goths was so great that
a persecution arose, under the stress of which many of his converts
determined to leave their homes and seek shelter in the dominions of the
great Christian Emperor. This happened about the year 348. The emigrants,
with Ulfilas at their head, ‘a second Moses,’ as he was often styled
by his contemporaries, crossed the Danube and founded a settlement in
the country about Nicopolis, on the northern slopes of the Balkans.
Here their descendants were still living after the lapse of nearly two
centuries[43], being known by the name of the Lesser Goths, ‘a numerous
people, but poor and unwarlike, having no abundance of anything, save
cattle of divers kinds, sheep and pastures and forests; having no wheat,
though the soil is fertile in other crops. Vineyards they do not possess,
but some of them as merchants buy wine from the neighbouring district:
but most of them are nourished on milk.’

Probably Ulfilas did not remain constantly with his Lesser Goths in
Moesia, but often crossed the Danube into Dacia, to strengthen the faith
of his remaining converts there, or to add to their number. Apparently
a second persecution broke out (if, indeed, it had ever ceased to
rage) about 370. From a fragment of a Gothic calendar we learn that
the 23rd October was dedicated ‘to the remembrance of many martyrs
among the Gothic people, and of Frederic’ (doubtless one of the heroes
of the persecution), and that the 29th was similarly dedicated ‘to the
remembrance of the martyrs who remained, with Priest Vereka and Batvin,
members of the Catholic Church, and were burned among the Gothic people.’

[Sidenote: _Athanaric Judge of the Visigoths._]

The leader of the persecuting party at this time was Judge Athanaric, a
stern, unbending Gothic chief, who would brook no compromise with Rome or
Roman ways, who had sworn a terrible oath that he would never set foot
on Roman soil, and who now, to the cruel utmost of his power, strove to
prevent Odin and Thunnor from being driven out of the Home of Gods by the
Nazarene, whose cross glittered upon the banners of Rome.

[Sidenote: _Fritigern._]

On the opposite side, as leader of that section of the Visigoths which
favoured the Roman civilisation and the Christian religion, appears the
gallant Fritigern, one of the most attractive figures whom Gothic history
presents to us. The contention between him and the bigoted old Gothic
party under Athanaric was so sharp that it seems to have broken out into
actual war, in which, as one author[44] tells us, Fritigern, on formally
announcing his conversion to Christianity, asked and received the help of
the Roman Emperor against his rival.

[Sidenote: _Outlook in 375._]

Such, then, was the relation of ‘Barbaricum’ towards ‘Romania’ about the
year 375. Reading (as we are too apt to do) our knowledge of subsequent
events into the history of that year, when the fourth century of our
era had reached its fourth quarter, it is easy to imagine the Roman
Empire lying rich and defenceless, at the mercy of barbarian foes all
round its border and all athirst to devour it. But such was certainly
not the aspect which it then wore to its contemporaries. The keen eye of
a statesman, if he were also possessed of fine ethical instincts, might
undoubtedly perceive many dangerous symptoms of moral and spiritual
decay, from which he might forebode its future downfall; but to the
ordinary observer, especially to the ordinary barbarian observer, seldom
had the great fabric of Roman civilisation seemed stronger or more
imposing. Of anything like a combined attack of the barbarian hordes upon
the Roman frontier, no barbarian dreamed. A petty raid here or there
might perhaps be successfully executed, and might enable its perpetrator
to return with some cattle from a few Moesian farms, or some bracelets
and golden chains from a sacked Illyrian town. But this was the height
of his ambition as Rome’s enemy. He would much rather be Rome’s friend:
enter her service as a leader of _foederati_[45]; mount guard in the
ante-chamber of the Emperor; direct the arms of Rome against some hated
rival chief; perhaps, even—supreme felicity—attain in his well-fed and
corpulent old age to the overwhelming honour of a Roman consulship.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Sudden appearance of the Huns. 374._]

The appearance on the northern shore of the Sea of Azof of a horde of
squalid savages from the steppes of Central Asia, each riding a little
pony as ugly and as unkempt as himself, changed the whole current of
men’s thoughts, and was the first visible link in the chain which drew
mediaeval Europe, the Europe of Charlemagne, Barbarossa, and Dante,

    ‘forth from the abyss of things that were to be.’

These savages were the terrible Huns, of whose history I shall have to
speak somewhat more in detail in my sixth lecture. For the present it
will be enough to quote a chapter from the work of the Gothic historian
Jordanes, in order to show how the Asiatic intruders were looked upon by
the first European nation with whom they came in contact[46].

[Sidenote: _Description of the Huns by Jordanes._]

‘After no great interval of time the nations of the Huns, more cruel
than Ferocity itself, flamed forth against the Goths. An unhallowed
union between unclean spirits wandering through the wilderness, and
certain Gothic women expelled [centuries before] for witchcraft from the
tents of their countrymen, gave birth to this most ferocious people,
which dwelt at first among the marshes—small, foul, and skinny, hardly
human, but spoken of as men because they possessed something which
distantly resembled human speech. This wild race formerly dwelt on the
further shore of the Sea of Azof, and there practised no other labour
than hunting, except that after they had grown into a great people they
harried the neighbouring nations with constant robberies and frauds.
Now when the huntsmen of this people were, according to their custom,
pursuing the chase on the further shore of Azof, behold, upon a sudden,
a female stag presented herself to their view, and stepping into the
pool, first going forth and then stopping, seemed to offer herself as
guide of their journey. Following her lead, therefore, the huntsmen
passed over on foot through the Sea of Azof, which they had before
thought to be as impassable as the ocean. Soon, too, when the Gothic
shore loomed up before those unknown visitors, the stag disappeared.
This, I trow, was done by those spirits to whom the Huns owed their
origin, in order to spite the Gothic people. The huntsmen who had
before thought that there was no other world beyond the Sea of Azof,
were stricken with admiration of the Gothic land, the road to which,
hitherto unknown, they deemed had been shown to them by the gods, and
going back to their own people, persuaded them to hasten by the path
which the stag had pointed out to them into the territory of the Goths.
All whom they met on the way fell victims to their fury, and as soon
as they had crossed that vast pool, five nations [whose uncouth names
I need not transcribe] were swept away by that whirlwind of savage
tribes. The Alans also, who were a match for them in war, but very unlike
them in civilisation, in appearance, and in diet, were wearied out by
them in incessant fighting, and at length subdued. For those whom they
would perhaps never have conquered in fair fight they put to flight
by the terribleness of their appearance, throwing the utmost possible
hideousness into the expression of their faces, which were naturally of
a frightful blackness, and resembled, if I may say so, a shapeless lump
of dough rather than a face, having two black points in them instead of
eyes. This scowling countenance reveals the boldness [?cruelty] of their
hearts, who rage against their new-born offspring even on the first
day of their birth, for all the male children’s cheeks are gashed by
them with an iron tool, in order that before they begin to receive the
nourishment of their mother’s milk they may learn to bear the pain of a
wound. Hence their youth lacks the beauty, and their old age the dignity
of a beard, because their faces, furrowed with iron, lose through scars
the seasonable beauty of hair. They are little in stature, but nimble and
clever in their movements, and especially ready in horsemanship: with
broad shoulders, arms well adapted to the use of the bow, necks strong,
and heads always held erect with pride. In short these people, wearing
the shape of man, practise in their lives the ferocity of beasts.’

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the uncouth sentences of the half-educated Gothic historian the
general character of the Hunnish invaders may be sufficiently discerned.
They stood on a distinctly lower grade of civilisation than any of the
Teutonic invaders of the Empire. The Goth, the Frank, the Alaman, the
Vandal were barbarians indeed, but barbarians with some capacity—in
the case of the Goth with an extraordinary capacity—for appreciating
the advantages of civilisation. The Hun, fresh from his centuries
of wandering over the high table-land of Tartary, was an utter, an
irreclaimable savage. To compare them with some of the native races with
which our own has recently come in contact, the Goth was like the Maori,
the Hun like a stronger and more warlike Australian savage.

[Sidenote: _The Huns were ‘Turanians,’ not Aryans._]

This social difference between the Hun and the Teuton corresponds to a
deep ethnological chasm. Hitherto all the great struggles in which the
European nations had been engaged (except the Punic wars) had been waged
between members of the great Aryan family of nations. Persian, Greek,
Italian, Celt, Teuton, however wide their divergences of religion, of
culture, of intellectual development, were yet all children of the same
family, some of whom, so to speak, had come of age, and entered into
their inheritance, while others were still in a state of infancy and
untaught childhood. But the Hun had no such link with the great historic
peoples of the Mediterranean Sea. In his language probably no germ of
affinity with Greek or Sanskrit would have been discernible. Wheresoever
the common home of the Indo-European peoples may eventually be located,
it is certain that the progenitors of the Hun never dwelt there. He was
of kin to the Mongol, the Calmuck, the Turk, not to the Roman or the
Englishman. In the world’s history he stands in line with Jenghiz Khan,
with Tamerlane, with Bajazet, not with Alexander or with Caesar. In one
word—to adopt a term which, however inaccurate, is convenient—he was not
Aryan, but Turanian.

[Sidenote: _A nation of light cavalry._]

Such then were the invaders from Asia, who, about the year 374,
precipitated themselves upon the settlements of the Ostrogoths in
Southern Russia. What they may have lacked in size they made up in
nimbleness of movement, and against the Goths, who do not appear to have
been pre-eminently an equestrian people, they had this advantage, that
every man of the tribe was mounted, and mounted on a hardy wiry little
steed, which was probably satisfied with the roughest food, and which so
perfectly understood its rider’s wishes, that it seemed as if horse and
horseman were one being.

[Sidenote: _Hermanric defeated._]

Details as to the conflict between the Huns and the Ostrogoths are
utterly wanting, but it is clear that the latter were completely
defeated. Hermanric, ‘the Ostrogothic Alexander’ who is said to have
reached the age of 110, in his rage and shame put an end to his own life.
His wide but loosely compacted empire was broken up. Some Ostrogoths,
under a prince of the house of Hermanric, moved southwards, and took part
in the events which we are about to notice, on the Danube. But the larger
part of the nation submitted to inevitable necessity and bowed their
necks to the yoke. For three quarters of a century the Ostrogoths formed
part of the great Hunnish Empire, and their sovereigns, descendants of
the great Hermanric, ruled as vassals of the Hunnish king.

[Sidenote: _Athanaric defeated. 375._]

The barbarian flood rolled on and reached the river Dniester and the long
line of earthworks which apparently separated the land of the Visigoths
from that of the Ostrogoths[47]. Here Athanaric had drawn up his men,
expecting a regular attack, to which he would have been prepared with a
regular reply. Little did he know the nature of the nimble savages with
whom he had to deal. Having learned from their scouts where the bulk of
the Visigothic army was posted (which was probably by the rampart rather
than by the river), and having found a ford across the Dniester, they
crossed that ford by moonlight and fell like a thunderbolt on the flank
of the unsuspecting Athanaric. He was stupefied at the assault, he saw
his bravest friends slain, and he found he had no resource but flight.
Withdrawing to the Carpathians he began to construct a new line of
defence, partly formed by those mountains and partly by the river Sereth.
He would have had but little leisure to construct this new stronghold,
had not the Huns been so burdened with their booty that they could not
follow him in haste.

[Sidenote: _The Visigoths seek refuge within the Empire. 376._]

And now that the strongest Gothic champions had been worsted, dismay
and despair entered the hearts of the Visigoths. To share the hardships
of a life in the Carpathians with Athanaric was not the course which
commended itself to the majority. They looked across the broad Danube to
the well-tilled plains of Moesia; they thought of the tightening bond
which had of late united them to the Empire; they turned to Fritigern,
the steadfast partisan of Rome, and deemed that through his friendship
for the Emperor they might find a refuge from the storm. Fritigern (who,
with a perhaps older colleague, Alavivus, is always spoken of as leader
of the migration) may perhaps, through Ulfilas, have opened negotiations
with the Imperial Court, negotiations which occupied many weeks, for
Valens, the reigning Emperor, was at Antioch. The terms which Fritigern
offered were that the Goths would all enter the military service of
the Empire, and apparently that those who were still heathens would
embrace the Emperor’s creed, which was one of the many forms of Arian
Christianity. On the other hand there must have been some stipulation as
to the supply of food, at least for one season, to give the new-comers
time to till the fields for a future harvest.

[Sidenote: _The Goths on the shore of the Danube._]

While the tedious negotiations were going forward, a strange sight might
be seen on that Wallachian shore of the Danube, where Europe beheld, in
1877, the vast host of the Russians manœuvring backwards and forwards,
in order to find a place where they might cross into Bulgaria. On that
same shore in the autumn of 376 stood 200,000 Goths, stretching out their
hands in the attitude of entreaty, bewailing the hard fate that had
befallen them, and shouting out, whenever a Roman official came within
hearing, their eager offers of fealty to the Emperor.

[Sidenote: _Valens gives them permission to cross._]

At length the answer came from Antioch. Valens was flattered by the
prospect of the submission of so many stalwart warriors; he persuaded
himself that by enlisting them under his standards he might lighten the
pressure of taxation on his subjects; he perhaps also thought that in
the battle of the creeds which was still being waged, the adhesion of a
strong and warlike nation to his own Arian form of faith would secure for
it the victory. This last consideration, however, which is all-important
on the pages of the ecclesiastical historians, was probably only a
secondary one in the minds of the Emperor and his Council.

[Sidenote: _The Danube crossed._]

[Sidenote: _Rapacity of the Roman officials._]

Whatever the determining cause may have been, the Imperial orders came
to Lupicinus the Count of Thrace, and Maximus the Duke of Moesia, that
the refugees were to be admitted into the Empire on condition that they
gave up their arms, and that the boys who were still under age for
martial service should be surrendered as hostages to be quartered in
various distant cities of the Empire. Thus the long suspense was ended.
The Visigoths, who night after night had feared to see the Hunnish
watch-fires blazing in the north and to hear the discordant battle-cry of
the Asiatics sounding in their ears, were relieved from their terrible
anxiety. To have to part with their gallant sons was hard: to have to
part with their old and trusty broadswords was harder, but life was
sweet. There was the Moesian shore and safety under the shadow of Rome,
and here were the sloops ready to carry them across to the Promised
Land. Night and day, for several days, the sloops were crossing and
re-crossing, till at length 200,000 Gothic warriors, with their wives,
and children, and aged parents, stood on the soil of the Empire. They
stood there, not unarmed. Already they had made their first experience
of the gigantic corruption of the Imperial service. Lupicinus and
Maximus, and the officers under them, avaricious and lustful men, while
superintending the transport of the Goths, were thinking all the time how
to fill their villas with precious spoil and beautiful captives, rather
than how to obey the orders of the Emperor. While they were intent on the
golden torques, the linen robes, the costly-fringed carpets of the Goths,
they allowed the broadswords and the hunting-knives to pass unquestioned.
Already before the disembarkation was well over, a bitter sense of
wrong, and consciousness of power to avenge that wrong, were brooding in
thousands of Gothic hearts.

We may perhaps say of the reception by Valens of the Gothic fugitives, as
of Elizabeth’s reception of Mary Queen of Scots, that either the request
for asylum should have been refused, or, if granted, it should have been
granted generously. There was abundance of room doubtless in the solitary
spaces of Moesia for 200,000 sturdy cultivators, and if they had been
wisely and fairly treated they might have formed a stout barrier against
all other barbarian invaders. Who can say? The Roman Empire might be
standing yet.

    ‘Trojaque nunc staret, Priamique arx alta maneret.’

But now, in addition to the grievance of their treasures stolen,
came the far sorer grievance of food withheld. The promised rations,
perhaps partly from incompetence as well as from bad faith, were not
forthcoming. With such money as they still possessed the unhappy Goths
offered to buy food: Lupicinus and Maximus bought up dogs from all the
districts round and sold their flesh to the starving immigrants in return
for slaves, among whom were some of the sons of the noblest of the Goths,
driven to barter even their children for life. Such wickedness as this,
thank God, does not often miss its reward even in this world.

A few months, however, elapsed before the storm of vengeance burst forth.
Let us take advantage of that short interval to describe the characters
of the rulers of the Roman State.

[Sidenote: _Roman Emperors._]

[Sidenote: West, _Valentinian I, 364-375._]

[Sidenote: East, _Valens, 364-378._]

For eleven years (364-375) after the death of Julian ‘the Apostate’
and his short-lived successor Jovian, Valentinian’s strong hand was
at the Empire’s helm. A blunt, untutored soldier, with a strange dash
of cruelty in his nature, he was nevertheless a good ruler for those
times. He held an even balance between the warring Christian sects,
insisting on toleration all round; he was careful not to oppress his
subjects by too heavy taxation; he defended them from the barbarians,
and he repressed the licentiousness which was sapping the energies of
the Empire. The worst thing that he did for his country was associating
his brother Valens in the throne, giving him the rule over the East.
Both in person and character Valens presented a striking contrast to his
brother. Valentinian was strong and well-shaped, with a bright complexion
and clear blue eye: everything about him told of energy and decision.
Valens, torpid and procrastinating, with muddy complexion, lack-lustre
eye, bent legs and protuberant belly, neither looked nor spoke like an
Emperor of Rome. And over against Valentinian’s inflexible and universal
religious tolerance had to be set the somewhat bitter Arianism of Valens.

[Sidenote: West, _Gratian, 375-383. Valentinian II, 375-392._]

A year before the Hunnish irruption into Europe Valentinian died, leaving
his brother Valens Emperor of the East, and his two sons, Gratian and
Valentinian II, Emperors of the West, the former at Trier, the latter at
Milan. Gratian was a lad full of noble promise, but only sixteen years of
age; Valentinian II was a child of four, under the regency of his mother,
Justina. Decidedly the Imperial partnership was weak, ill-adapted for
the strain of a great crisis, and what made it yet weaker was that it
was not united. The dull soul of the sluggish Valens was jealous of his
brilliant nephew, who was already showing military aptitudes and earning
the devotion of his troops. Justina also, who was the second wife of the
deceased Emperor, looked probably with no friendly eye on the growing
reputation of her step-son. The _Concordia Augustorum_[48], which was so
often celebrated on the Imperial medals, was not strong in the year 376.

[Sidenote: _The banquet at Marcianople. 377._]

We return to the affairs of the betrayed and hunger-stricken Goths.
There was as yet no open insurrection, but Alavivus and Fritigern were
marching about in Moesia in a way which seemed to indicate independence
and growing suspicion; and, moreover, some of the bands of their
Ostrogothic cousins had taken advantage of the disorder of the times,
and the occupied attention of the Imperial soldiery, to cross the Danube
on rafts and pitch their camp not far from Fritigern’s. Before long
Alavivus and Fritigern appeared at the gates of Marcianople (the modern
Shumla), an important city at the intersection of two great cross-roads,
and commanding a pass through the Balkans. The two Visigothic chiefs were
still ostensibly captains of the Emperor’s _foederati_, and Lupicinus,
Count of Thrace, bade them to a banquet. The barbarians who followed
them had flocked into the city to purchase provisions. A dispute arose
between them and the citizens which led to bloodshed, and the news of
the disturbance reached Lupicinus when he was reclining at the luxurious
banquet, flushed with wine and scarcely keeping his heavy eyes open
by gazing at the performers of a pantomime. Languidly he ordered the
tall young Gothic nobles who were keeping guard over their chief at the
door of the _praetorium_ to be hewn down by the far more numerous Roman
soldiery. The groans of the dying, and the battle-shout of those who were
yet fighting for their lives, penetrated the innermost chambers of the
palace, and aroused Fritigern from the pleasures of the dainty repast.
If his host sought to soothe him by alleging that it was only a drunken
brawl that was going on outside,

    ‘his soul more truly knew that sound too well.’

He drew his sword and stalked down through the banquet hall, exclaiming
that if there was a tumult among the Goths he alone could quell it. The
pretext, or the naked sword, secured him a safe passage through the
trembling ranks of the banqueters. He was received with a shout of joy
by his surviving companions. They mounted their horses and rode out of
the gates of the city; and now, openly declaring war against the Empire,
began to plunder and to burn the rich farmsteads in the neighbourhood of
Marcianople. Lupicinus marched forth to meet them at the ninth milestone
from the city; but his troops, hastily collected, were badly led. The
Goths, in their fury and despair, beat down their enemies. All the
tribunes (commissioned officers) and the larger part of the rank and file
were stretched in death upon the plain. The base Lupicinus, whose cruelty
and avarice had caused the disaster, escaped from this battle-field, but
before long both he and his colleague in guilt, Maximus, fell victims to
the righteous vengeance of the Goths[49].

That day, that fatal day of the banquet at Marcianople, ‘took away,’ says
the Gothic historian, ‘the hunger of the Goths and the security of the
Romans; and the former now began, not as strangers and foreigners, but as
citizens and lords, to issue their orders to the cultivators of the soil,
and to hold all the northern regions [from the Balkans] to the Danube in
their own right.’

[Sidenote: _377-378. Gothic War._]

[Sidenote: _377. Battle of Ad Salices._]

The war thus commenced lasted, with varying success, through the years
377 and 378. The Emperor Valens, during the whole of the former year,
remained at Antioch, but sent two officers of high rank, but of no great
military skill, to conduct the campaign in his stead. On the whole,
however, the fortune of war must have been unfavourable to the Goths (who
evidently fought with more fury than science), since the chief battle of
this year was fought at a place called Ad Salices (the Willows), as far
north as the region now known as the Dobrudscha. Our chief historian[50]
(himself long an officer of rank in the Imperial army) gives a striking
description of the Gothic warriors, encamped in the centre of a rampart
of waggons, and revelling in the abundance of the booty which they had
carried off from the wasted plains of Thrace. All night the two armies
lay encamped near to one another in sleepless suspense. With the dawn
of day the barbarians made an attempt to reach some higher ground, from
whence they might rush down on the enemy; but this manœuvre was checked
by a well-executed counter-movement of the legions. As both armies halted
and gazed at one another with scowling faces, the Romans raised their
martial song (itself borrowed from other barbarians), which was known
as the _barritus_, and which, beginning in a low bass key, rose, as it
were, by steps to a shrill and exultant treble. The barbarians answered
by the old war-songs (discordant in Roman ears, but in which our Saxon
forefathers would probably have found familiar music), wherein they sang
the praises of their glorious ancestors, sprung from the seed of gods,
and dear to Odin.

Then the battle was joined, and the marshy willow-intersected plain
was seen covered with every phase of human agony; but all was din and
confusion, and if any well-concerted plan was formed or executed on
either side, it does not appear in the pages of the historian. The battle
was a drawn one; but apparently the Romans were left in possession of the
field, for their dead were buried, while the bodies of the Goths were
left to be devoured by vultures. Years after, the husbandman, ploughing
in that fatal plain, marvelled at the mighty bones of the barbarians
which his plough-share upturned.

[Sidenote: _Advance of Gratian._]

In this battle good service had been rendered by some troops which
Gratian had sent from Gaul to the assistance of his uncle. The young
Emperor had had his own hard battles to fight with the barbarians who
dwelt on the northern shore of the Lake of Constance, but having subdued
them he marched eastwards in 378 as far as Sirmium on the Save, from
which place he sent a message to Valens that he was ready to co-operate
with him in an attack on the Goths, whose invasion seemed to imperil the
very existence of the eastern portion of the Empire.

[Sidenote: _378. Valens at Hadrianople._]

But Valens, who had by this time quitted Antioch for Constantinople, was
jealous of his young nephew’s fame, and in no humour to add one needless
leaf of laurel to his crown. He had pitched his camp near Hadrianople,
and there received the messengers of Gratian, who earnestly besought
him to wait for their master’s arrival. So Victor advised, a Slavonic
barbarian by birth, but master of the Imperial cavalry, and a careful and
cautious general. So, however, did not advise his other chief general
Sebastian, who was elated by some recent victories that he had won over
the barbarians: and his rash counsels found too sure an echo in the
jealous heart of Valens. It was decided to fight at once and end the
Gothic war by the unaided forces of the East.

[Sidenote: _Negotiations between Fritigern and Valens._]

But Fritigern on his side had allies whose arrival he was expecting.
The Ostrogothic chiefs, Alatheus and Saphrax, were on their march to
join him, and he would fain postpone the battle till they arrived. He
therefore sent a Christian priest on an embassy to Valens, offering to
make peace if he and his followers might be allowed to occupy Thrace as
subjects of the Empire. Nothing came of these negotiations; nothing was
meant to come of them; but time was gained for Alatheus and Saphrax to
accomplish another day’s march towards the army of Fritigern.

[Sidenote: _Battle of Hadrianople, 9 Aug. 378._]

On the 9th August, 378, a day long and fatally memorable in the annals of
the Empire, the legions of Valens moved forth from their entrenched camp
under the walls of Hadrianople, and after a march of eight miles under
the hot sun of August came in sight of the barbarian vanguard, behind
which stretched the circling line of the waggons that guarded the Gothic
host.

Yet another embassy did the artful Fritigern (perhaps not over-confident
of victory) send into the Roman camp. There were discussions as to the
dignity and powers of the messengers: the Goth was willing to send one
of his noblest chiefs if the Roman would do the same as a pledge of his
safety. Richomer, Count of the Domestics, Gratian’s representative,
expressed his willingness to go as a hostage into the barbarian camp,
but scarcely had he reached it when, behold! fresh standards were seen
upon the surrounding hills. The long-waited for troops of Alatheus and
Saphrax had arrived, and not pausing in their headlong career fell like a
thunderbolt on the Roman flank.

The soldiers of the Empire, hot, thirsty, wearied out with hours of
waiting under the blaze of an August sun, and only half understanding
that the negotiations were ended and the battle begun, fought at a
terrible disadvantage, but fought not ill. The infantry on the left wing
seem even to have pushed back their enemies and penetrated to the Gothic
waggons. But they were for some reason not covered as usual by a force
of cavalry, and they were jammed into a too narrow space of ground where
they could not use their spears with effect, yet presented a terribly
easy mark to the Gothic arrows. They fell in dense masses as they had
stood. Then the whole weight of the enemy’s attack was directed against
the centre and right. When the evening began to close in, the utterly
routed Roman soldiers were rushing in disorderly flight from the fatal
field. The night, dark and moonless, may have protected some, but more
met their death rushing blindly over a rugged and unknown country.

[Sidenote: _Fate of Valens._]

Meanwhile, Valens had sought shelter with a little knot of soldiers (the
two regiments of Lancearii and Mattiarii), who still remained unmoved
amidst the surging sea of ruin. When their ranks too were broken, and
when some of his bravest officers had fallen around him, he joined the
common soldiers in their headlong flight. Struck by a Gothic arrow he
fell to the ground, but was carried off by some of the eunuchs and
life-guardsmen who still accompanied him, to a peasant’s cottage hard by.
The Goths, ignorant of his rank, but eager to strip the gaily-clothed
guardsmen, surrounded the cottage and attempted in vain to burst in the
doors. Then mounting to the roof they tried to smoke out the imprisoned
inmates, but succeeding beyond their desires, set fire to the cottage,
and Emperor, eunuchs, and life-guards perished in the flames. Only one
of the body-guard escaped, who climbed out through one of the blazing
windows and fell into the hands of the barbarians. He told them when
it was too late what a prize they had missed in their cruel eagerness,
nothing less than the Emperor of Rome.

Ecclesiastical historians for generations delighted to point the moral
of the story of Valens, that he who had seduced the whole Gothic nation
into the heresy of Arius, and thus caused them to suffer the punishment
of everlasting fire, was himself by those very Goths burned alive on the
terrible 9th of August.




LECTURE IV.

THEODOSIUS.


[Sidenote: _378._]

In the battle of Hadrianople two-thirds of the Roman army fell. The two
Counts, Sebastian and Trajan (the General-in-Chief and his predecessor),
Valerian, the Count of the Imperial Stables, and Aequitius, a relation
of the Emperor and Superintendent of his palace[51], were all stretched
dead upon the field. There too lay thirty-five Tribunes, officers whose
military rank corresponded with that of our Colonels. The historian says,
with perfect truth, that since the day of Cannae no such disaster had
befallen the Roman army. Nor had the Roman State, now in the twelfth
century of its existence, the same power of recovering from its reverses
which it possessed in the sixth century from the building of the City,
when the statue of Victory in the Capitol drooped her wings at the news
of the slaughter on the Apulian plain.

[Sidenote: _Movements of the Goths after the battle of Hadrianople._]

[Sidenote: _378. Siege of Constantinople._]

Yet the Goths, though they had shown that they could win a battle, had
as yet neither discipline nor warlike art sufficient to enable them to
conquer in a campaign. An unsuccessful attack on Hadrianople was followed
by an equal failure before the walls of Constantinople. By a strange
inversion of its future fates, the Imperial capital by the Bosphorus was
defended from these Visigoths (the ancestors of Don John of Austria and
of all the Christian chivalry of Spain) by a body of Saracen soldiers
who had been enlisted under the banners of the Empire. One of these wild
defenders of civilisation, nearly naked but with long and shaggy hair,
dashed forward with a melancholy howl into the Gothic ranks, stabbed an
enemy with his short sword, and then putting his lips to the neck of the
slain foe sucked his life-blood with eager zest. The thought of fighting
against such monsters as this was too terrible for the impressionable
Goths, and they retired disheartened from the walls.

[Sidenote: _Weakness of the Goths as besiegers._]

[Sidenote: _A Roman siege-train._]

[Sidenote: _378-9._]

But, quite independently of any such exceptional causes of panic,
there was a striking weakness in the Gothic attack whenever they came
face to face with a fenced city. When Fritigern marched away from the
treacherous city of Marcianople, crying out, ‘I wage no war on stone
walls,’ he expressed that which was of necessity the maxim of all the
barbarian warriors during the succeeding century. It cannot be said
that at this time the powers of the defence in sieges were necessarily
superior to those of the attack. On the contrary, in the wars between
Persia and Rome it is remarkable how often the same cities were taken
and retaken. But a siege required patience, mechanical skill, and
untiring vigilance, and could not be decided by a mere outburst of
Berserker fury such as sometimes swept the legions before it on the
field of battle. In reading the account of a Roman siege-train given
by Ammianus Marcellinus[52], though I cannot say that I understand all
his explanations (and I believe it would require the combination of an
expert mechanician and an invincible translator of Latin to make sense
of many of them), still it is easy to perceive this much—that a siege
was then, as now, practically a duel of artillery, though in the working
of that artillery the explosive force of gunpowder was not made use of,
and that it was by the engineer, rather than by the warrior, that the
strongest city was taken. There was the _Balista_, for the discharge
of the strong iron-shod wooden arrow; the _Scorpion_, or the _Wild
Ass_[53], which suddenly reared itself high in air and hurled forth its
heavy stone; the _Battering Ram_[54], for butting at all the weakest
places in a wall; the _City-taker_[55], which fastened its triangular
prongs into the wall and tore it to pieces. By these and by the great
moving towers the city was attacked, and by machines as complicated and
as destructive, but of a somewhat different kind, it was defended. For
all this sort of work, as I have said, not only the humbler qualities
of the soldier—patience and vigilance—but also some of the skill of a
trained mechanician, were needed; and these qualities, abundantly present
in many even of the common soldiers among the Italians, the Greeks, and
the Persians, were yet wanting in the untutored brains of the Teutonic
warriors. Therefore the story of the wars between the barbarians and
the Empire is for the most part a story of monotonous uniformity of
ill-success, as far as the sieges undertaken by the former are concerned.
They win battles in the open field; they occupy the great Roman roads,
and cut off communication between the provinces and the capital; they
lay waste the country districts, and sometimes by the famine thus caused
they deprive the citizens of the means of prolonging their resistance.
More often, by the treachery of slaves or fellow-countrymen of their own
inside the walls, they bring about the city’s fall; but scarcely ever do
they take it by fair and open warfare, in a regularly-conducted siege.
And for a considerable part of those seventy years of struggle which I am
briefly describing to you, you must think of the cities as standing up
behind their quadrangular walls, little islands of civilisation and still
unshaken loyalty to the Empire, while over the fields and through the
unwalled villages rages the wide-sweeping flood of barbarian invasion.

[Sidenote: _The Gothic attack grows feebler, 378-379._]

This was essentially the character of the war during the years 378 and
379, though the Roman defence was gradually becoming stronger, and the
attacks of the Goths wilder and more purposeless during the whole of
that period. The despair and the hatred which had banded them together
as one man under the leadership of Fritigern, lost their uniting power.
They roamed southwards into the pleasant lands of Achaia, northwards
to the Save, into and perhaps across the borders of Pannonia; but the
hope of plunder and a child’s love of breaking beautiful things seem to
have been their only motives. There is no longer a trace of that serious
purpose of conquest which does seem to have animated them up to the day
of Hadrianople.

[Sidenote: _The Gothic hostage-boys massacred. 378-9._]

One vile deed of a Roman official must have stirred many Gothic hearts
to fury, yet did not receive its proper meed of vengeance. It will
be remembered that when the Visigothic warriors were ferried across
the Danube in the Imperial cutters, they were compelled to deliver up
the sons of the noblest among them as hostages. These lads had been
distributed through the cities of the East: while their fathers and
their kindred had been suffering the hardships of famine, they had been
growing up to manhood, and it was feared that the news of the victory of
Hadrianople might arouse them to some deed of daring against the Empire.
Julius, Master of the Soldiery[56], to whose care these young hostages
had been especially committed, sent for the various military prefects,
and after binding them to secrecy under solemn oaths, communicated to
them his bloody purpose. The young Goths in each district were invited to
the capital of the province under promise of receiving grants of money
and land from the Emperor. They came full of hope and of good-humour
towards their hosts. As soon as they were all collected in the forum
of each city, the soldiers, who had been previously stationed on the
roofs of the surrounding houses, assailed them with darts and stones.
They were of course utterly unable to strike a blow in return against
their cowardly assailants, and each Asiatic forum soon had its heap of
unresisting slain. A base and treacherous deed, and one which we regret
to find both our two chief historians[57] of this period mentioning with
words of praise for its cowardly contrivers.

[Sidenote: _Gratian associates Theodosius in the Imperial dignity._]

The disorganisation of the Empire after the battle of Hadrianople was
complete, and Gratian wisely concluded that he, a lad of nineteen, was
not able, unaided, to bring it to a close. He looked around him for a
colleague, and recognised with the frankness of his noble nature that
there was no man so suitable for the post as one whom his family had
deeply wronged, the late Duke of Moesia, THEODOSIUS.

[Sidenote: _Origin of Theodosius._]

This man, whose name in various ways has become so famous in the history
both of the Empire and the Church, was born about the year 346 at a place
called Cauca, in the north-western corner of Spain. He belonged by birth
to the class of wealthy Provincials from which many of the officials of
the Empire were chosen, and who constituted in fact, if not in name,
a sort of rural nobility. After he had been clothed with the purple,
flatterers and poets discovered that he was a remote descendant of the
great Emperor Trajan, but this seems to have been only a courtier-like
deduction from the fact that he, like Trajan, was a Spaniard.

[Sidenote: _368-376._]

[Sidenote: _Theodosius the Elder._]

[Sidenote: _376-379._]

His father, Count Theodosius, had been sent to Britain in 368 to repel
an invasion of Picts, Scots, and Attacotti, and making the old town of
Lundinium his base of operations, had attacked the various parties of
freebooters who were roaming about the country, and had succeeded in
spoiling the spoilers, and restoring the greater part of their property
to the plundered provincials. Two years afterwards he had delivered
Raetia (Tyrol and the Grisons) from a similar invasion of the Alamanni,
and had sent many of the invaders to Italy to cultivate as serfs the
meadow lands of the Po. In 373 he conducted a most successful campaign in
Africa against a Mauritanian chieftain, Firmus, who had rebelled against
the Emperor. The rebel committed suicide, and his conqueror, with the
title of _Comes Africae_, administered the government of the province
which he had saved. Then came a sudden check to his prosperous course.
In 376, shortly after the death of Valentinian, he was accused, we know
not on what charge, sentenced to death, and beheaded at Carthage, having
first received the sacrament of baptism. The cause of this strange and
sad termination of an honourable career has never been explained. Some
think that the young Gratian, only just arrived at the helm of affairs,
was jealous of the veteran’s fame, but nothing in the character of
that Emperor justifies so foul a charge. Others believe that his real
offence was having exposed the villainies and peculations of Romanus,
his predecessor in the government of Africa. But it seems to me on the
whole most probable that his death was in some way connected with an
outburst of jealous rage and suspicion on the part of Valens against all
persons whose names began with the letters THEOD, Theodorus, Theodoret,
and so forth, as it had come to the ears of the Emperor that a citizen
of Antioch had been resorting to magical arts to learn the name of his
future successor, and that those letters (which proved fatal to many a
Roman citizen) had been revealed by the oracle as forming the beginning
of the fated name.

On the death of his father, the young Theodosius, then about thirty years
of age, who had done good service to the State as Duke of Moesia, retired
into private life. If, as was probably the case, he was succeeded by the
base and corrupt Maximus, whose avarice drove the Goths to despair, the
unjust death of the elder Theodosius was indeed soon and terribly avenged
on his ungrateful masters.

[Sidenote: _Theodosius Emperor of the East, 19 Jan. 379._]

Now, however, the fortunes of the house of Theodosius emerged from the
cloud, more resplendent than ever. The new Emperor was clothed in the
purple and invested with ‘the rule of the universe’ (ἡ τῶν ὅλων ἀρχή) at
Sirmium, on the 19th of January, 379. The share of the Empire assigned
to his immediate superintendence was of course the East, together with
Macedonia and Dacia. The rest of the Diocese of Illyricum was joined, now
as on many other occasions, to the Western half of the Empire.

[Sidenote: _Guerilla War. 379-380._]

The first duty that Theodosius had to undertake was to restore the
self-confidence and trust in victory of the Roman army, terribly shaken
as these qualities had been by the disastrous rout of Hadrianople. This
he accomplished by waging a successful guerilla war with the Gothic
marauders. Valens had played into the hands of the barbarians by risking
everything on one great pitched battle. Theodosius adopted the very
opposite policy. He outmanœuvred the isolated and straggling bands of the
Goths, defeated them in one skirmish after another that did not deserve
the name of a battle, and thus restored the courage and confidence of the
Imperial troops. By the end of 379 he seems to have succeeded in clearing
the territory south of the Balkan range of the harassing swarms of the
barbarians.

[Sidenote: _Sickness of Theodosius._]

In February, 380, he fell sick at Thessalonica (which was his chief basis
of operations throughout this period), and this sickness, from which he
did not fully recover for some months, was productive of two important
results, (1) his baptism as a Trinitarian Christian, (2) a renewal of the
war against fresh swarms of barbarians.

[Sidenote: _Theodosius adopts the Creed of Nicaea. 380._]

(1) Theodosius appears up to this point of his career not to have
definitely ranged himself on either side of the great Arian controversy,
though he had a hereditary inclination towards the Creed of Nicaea. Like
his father, however, he had postponed baptism in accordance with the
prevalent usage of his day: but now upon a bed of sickness which seemed
likely to be one of death, he delayed no longer, but received the rite at
the hands of Ascholius, the Catholic Bishop of Thessalonica. Before he
was able to resume his post at the head of the legions, he published his
celebrated Edict: ‘To the people of Constantinople.—We desire that all
the nations who are governed by the rule of our Clemency shall practise
that religion which the Apostle Peter himself delivered to the Romans,
and which it is manifest that the pontiff Damasus, and Peter, Bishop of
Alexandria, a man of Apostolic sanctity, do now follow: that according
to the discipline of the Apostles and the teaching of the Evangelists
they believe in the one Godhead of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in equal
Majesty, and in the holy Trinity. We order all who follow this law to
assume the name of Catholic Christians, decreeing that all others, being
mad and foolish persons, shall bear the infamy of their heretical dogmas,
and that their Conventicles shall not receive the name of Churches: to be
punished first by Divine vengeance, and afterwards by that exertion of
our power to chastise which we have received from the decree of heaven.’

[Sidenote: _The power of the Eastern State now enlisted on the side of
Orthodoxy._]

Thus then at length the Caesar of the East was ranged on the side of
Trinitarian orthodoxy. Constantine in the latter part of his reign,
Constantius, Valens, had all been Arians or semi-Arians, some of them
bitter in their heterodoxy. Julian had been a worshipper of the gods of
Olympus. Thus for nearly two generations the influence of the Court of
Constantinople had been thrown into the scale against the teaching of
Athanasius, which was generally accepted throughout the Western realm.
Now by the accession of Theodosius to the Trinitarian side, religious
unity was restored to the Empire: but at the same time a chasm, an
impassable chasm, was opened between the Empire itself and its new
Teutonic guests, nearly all of whom held fast to the Arian teaching of
their great Apostle Ulfilas.

[Sidenote: _Further inroads of the barbarians._]

(2) The other consequence of the sickness of Theodosius was, as I have
said, a fresh incursion of barbarian hordes, swarming across the Danube
and climbing all the high passes of the Balkans. The work of clearing the
country of these marauders had to be all done over again. One dark night,
when the Emperor was encamping in Macedonia, the barbarians, seeing a
particularly bright watch-fire burning, and rightly conjecturing that
it marked the tent of the Emperor, made a sudden dash and very nearly
succeeded in sending Theodosius to rejoin his predecessor Valens. There
was a terrible struggle: few Romans against the overwhelming hosts of
the Goths, but the soldiers of Theodosius, who loved him well, fought on
desperately till he had escaped, and then fell dead, surrounded by an
uncounted host of slain barbarians.

[Sidenote: _Reinforcements sent by Gratian, 380._]

The campaign of 380 was such a hard one that Theodosius had to solicit
reinforcements from his colleague Gratian, which were sent to him under
the command of Bauto and Arbogast, two Frankish chiefs who had entered
the Imperial service. Indeed all along the line, in the West as in
the East, the characteristic feature of this period was the number of
barbarians who attained high rank in the legions of Rome, and who upon
the whole served her with marked fidelity.

At length, in the closing months of 380, the provinces south of the
Balkans (Macedonia and Thrace) were once more cleared of their barbarian
intruders. Peace, in which Gratian concurred, was concluded with the
Goths who still doubtless abounded in Moesia; and Theodosius on the 24th
of November entered Constantinople in state.

[Sidenote: _Theodosius welcomes Athanaric at Constantinople, 381._]

[Sidenote: _Athanaric’s death._]

The inhabitants of the New Rome by the Bosphorus, who perhaps had not
before seen Theodosius as Emperor, were soon to behold a ruler of a
very different type side by side with the courtly and magnificent
Spaniard. The grey old Visigoth, Athanaric, had been driven, apparently
by Ostrogothic invaders, from his airy stronghold in the Carpathians.
The death of Fritigern (which seems to have happened about this time)
left him the chief ruler of the scattered and disorganised Visigothic
nation. Converted from his old, almost religious prejudice against Rome,
and recanting the oath which he had once sworn never to set foot on the
soil of the Empire, he now crossed the Danube and accepted the Emperor’s
invitation to visit him in his capital, probably in order to ratify and
proclaim to the world the peace just concluded between ‘Romania’ and
‘Gothia.’ We must let the Gothic historian tell the story of this visit
in his own expressive words[58].

‘Theodosius attached to himself King Athanaric, who had succeeded
Fritigern, by the gifts which he gave him, and in the kindest terms
invited him to visit him at Constantinople; who accepted right willingly
and said, marvelling, “Lo, I behold, what often I heard incredulously,
the fame of so great a city.” Then turning his eyes this way and that,
now he admires the position of the city and the concourse of ships, now
the long clearly-marked line of the walls, and then again the natives
from so many different stocks bubbling up like water from one fountain
in many directions, yet all disciplined like well-trained soldiers.
“A god,” he said, “without doubt a god upon earth is the Emperor, and
whoever moveth a hand against him, that man is guilty of his own blood.”
In such a state of admiration, being supported by the yet greater honours
which he received from the Emperor, after the interval of a few months
[or more correctly fourteen days[59]] he departed from the light of day.
Whom the Emperor out of the love which he bore to him, honouring almost
more as dead than as alive, delivered to a worthy burial, himself going
before the bier in his solemn obsequies. Therefore when Athanaric was
dead, all his army, remaining in the service of the Emperor Theodosius,
and submitting itself to the Roman Empire, formed as it were one body
with the [Imperial] soldiery, that old enlistment of the Foederati under
the Emperor Constantine being now renewed, and they themselves were now
called Foederati.’

[Sidenote: _The bulk of the Goths become Foederati of the Empire._]

There can be no doubt that the politic courtesy which Theodosius showed
to Athanaric exercised an important influence on the relations which
existed for the next fifteen years between the Empire and the Goths.
If we look at the position of the two parties to the contract we shall
see that the conclusion or the renewal of the _Foedus_ between them was
really for the interest of both. For the Empire, a complete reversal
of the policy of Valens was now impossible. Ever since the day when
the last of the 200,000 Gothic warriors was ferried across the Danube,
their inclusion in the Empire in one capacity or another had become
an accomplished and irreversible fact. They could not be thrust back
into their old Dacian home, where by this time the Huns were probably
swarming, but they might be converted from the ravagers of Thrace into
the tillers of Moesia. They might be made the stalwart defenders of the
Danubian frontier against those very Huns, and against the motley horde
of Teutons, Slaves, and Tartars who flocked around their standard of
squalid and anarchic despotism.

On the other hand the Goths, unable to capture the strong cities of the
Empire, could not live perpetually on the mere ravage of the Thracian
home-steads. Viewing the movements of peoples and the migrations of
barbarous tribes from the high historic standpoint, and especially seeing
what these movements and migrations actually accomplished in the fifth
century of our era, we are apt to think that the conquest of kingdoms and
the foundation of empires was the deliberate and persistent purpose of
chief and people. On the contrary, if we could be present in the rough
councils which gathered around their camp-fires and listen to the talk
of the warriors with their wives in the great Gothic waggons, we should
probably discover that the question in what way and from what source the
next day’s meal was to be provided, was far more often and more anxiously
debated than any question of high policy or dream of world-conquest. Now,
by the policy which Theodosius seemed willing to adopt of renewing the
old _Foedus_ between Rome and her Gothic friends, food, and comfortable
homes, and a distinguished career in arms were assured to the meanest
Gothic soldier, and admission to the dignities and luxuries of the most
splendid court in the world was assured to their chiefs. The Roman
Empire was still, if I may use a commercial phrase, ‘a going concern.’
The barbarians had power to wreck it and drive it into bankruptcy? Yes,
perhaps they had: but it was surely a far more alluring prospect to take
shares in the company and touch some part of the enormous profits which
accrued to the directors.

This kind of calculation—and I have purposely chosen a commercial
metaphor in order to indicate the perfectly selfish character of the
bargain—prevailed at this time in the minds of the barbarians over any
dim and shadowy dreams which might linger there of setting up a new and
conquering Visigothic kingdom between the Danube and the Balkans. But
then, when self-interest was prompting them to this course, sentiment
was enlisted on the same side by the generous hospitality offered to the
worn-out veteran Athanaric in the great city of the South, by his own
childlike admiration of the wonders which she displayed to his view, by
the splendid funeral, and by the sight of the courtly Augustus, robed in
the purple and wearing the diadem of Empire, escorting the Gothic warrior
to his tomb.

[Sidenote: _What did the relation of Foederati involve?_]

What the precise nature of the tie was which bound the _foederati_ to the
Empire I do not think we can definitely explain. From time immemorial
Rome had fought her battles with troops pretty equally divided between
the legions (theoretically composed of pure Roman citizens) and the
_Auxilia_ (consisting of her subject-allies). These allies had at first
been chiefly dwellers in the cities of Latium, but by the time that
we have now reached they were gathered from almost every nation under
heaven. Here, in our own Northumberland, all the garrison duty along the
Wall was done by these auxiliary troops. Asturians from Spain, Tungrians
and Batavians from Holland, Dacians from Transylvania, and Dalmatians
from the eastern shore of the Hadriatic, were keeping watch for Rome on
these wind-swept hills. But _those_ allies were still distinctly Roman
soldiers, who served under Roman officers, and were amenable to Roman
discipline. The bond which held the _foederati_ to the Empire appears to
have been a much looser one. It would seem that the federated Goths still
served under their own native chiefs, and retained to a large extent
their national weapons and their own peculiar manner of fighting. They no
doubt had lands assigned to them, chiefly in Moesia, which they may have
cultivated partly with their own hands and partly by the forced labour
of _coloni_. In fact, though we are of course still many centuries off
from regular feudal rights and obligations, there was probably something
in the relation of a chief of _foederati_ to the Emperor not altogether
unlike the relation of a feudal baron to his lord paramount.

[Sidenote: _Results of the policy of Theodosius._]

The scheme of Theodosius answered as a temporary expedient. It gave
security to the Danubian frontier for his day; perhaps had his successors
been men of equal ability with himself it might have prolonged that
security for centuries. But there were some obvious dangers attending
it. Evidently these masses of men, trained to act together, obeying
their own princes, and conscious of their strength, might one day turn
against Rome the weapons which they were now wielding on her behalf.
The ‘provincials,’ the earlier subjects of Rome, finding their services
less needed, would grow unused to warfare, and would in the course of
time be almost sure to sink into a despised and spiritless caste, among
whom the proud Teutonic _foederatus_ would stalk with an exasperating
consciousness of superiority. Above all, the Emperor himself, having
the barbarians for his tent companions, the sharers of his dangers, the
confidants of his councils, and the supporters of his throne, would
get to lean more and more upon them, and might become an Emperor of
barbarians instead of an Emperor of the civilised commonwealth of Rome.

The whole history of Theodosius shows that this was a very real danger
in his time. There was something in his own character, fond as he was
of pomp and spectacle and the mere outward trappings of royalty, which
harmonised only too well with the nature of the barbarians. While he
was surrounding himself with troops of tall and brilliantly-accoutred
_foederati_, and spending his time and the money of his subjects over an
endless round of games and chariot-races, and on sumptuous banquets at
which the Gothic ‘wassail’ was loudly heard, the provinces were groaning
under the demands of the tax-gatherer; and the machine of administration
which Valens, with all his faults, had superintended with some diligence,
was daily getting into more and more hopeless disorganisation.

[Sidenote: _Insurrection of Antioch, 387._]

Both the two great insurrections which broke out in the reign of
Theodosius, and each of which is connected with the story of a great
father of the Church, sprang, directly or indirectly, from the favour
shown by the Emperor to his _foederati_. In the year 387 he determined
to celebrate the fifth year of the reign of his young son Arcadius, whom
he had associated with him in the Empire, in a style of extraordinary
magnificence. For this purpose there must be more splendid games, more
exciting chariot-races, and, above all, a more liberal donative to the
soldiery than any that had yet been given. In order to supply funds for
these various expenses, a new tax (probably what was called the _aurum
coronarium_) was levied on the cities of the Empire. At the news of
this fresh imposition, the citizens of Antioch, already ground down to
the very dust by the pressure of the ordinary taxation, broke out into
open rebellion. While the more respectable and religious citizens betook
themselves to the churches to pray God to change the Emperor’s purpose,
or besought the Bishop Flavianus to intercede for the removal of the tax,
a mob of boys and ‘lewd fellows of the baser sort’ visited the spacious
Baths, and cutting the ropes by which the lamps were suspended, caused
them to fall with a crash on the pavement. Then the boys began to throw
stones at the wooden statues of the Emperor and his family. They shouted
for joy when one of the statues was split in pieces; they groaned when
one, more stubborn than the rest, long resisted their assaults. They then
went to the more costly bronze statues, pulled them from their pedestals
with ropes, dragged them ignominiously through the streets, and ended by
giving them to the children to play with. What made the insult the more
bitter was, that not only the statues of the Emperor himself, but those
of the noble old veteran his father, of his lately deceased wife, and of
his young son and colleague, were all treated with the same contumely.
Next came an attempt at fire-raising in the house of a magistrate who
tried to persuade them to cease their rioting; and last, the appearance
of some Imperial archers, who discharged their arrows upon the crowd.
Thereupon at once the tumult, which had flamed up so high and seemed so
menacing, died down like a fire of straw.

[Sidenote: _Reaction from insolence to panic._]

The insult to the majesty of the Emperor had been great, perhaps
unforgiveable. The whole city passed in an hour from the extreme of
insolence and anarchy to the extreme of cowed submission and abject
terror, while the messengers bearing the fatal tidings were going to and
returning from Constantinople. The sedition had broken out a few days
before Lent (387), and the whole of the forty days of that sacred season
were indeed days of fasting and humiliation to the luxurious citizens
of Antioch. About the middle of them arrived a letter from the Emperor,
sharply rebuking the Town Council for allowing the sedition to gain such
a height, ordering that the Theatre, the Hippodrome, and the Baths should
all be closed, and depriving Antioch of the rank, which she had held for
six centuries, as capital of Syria. Shortly after appeared two Imperial
Commissioners—Caesarius and Ellebichus—charged to make enquiry into the
recent events; and they began their enquiry by putting all the Senators
of Antioch into close confinement.

[Sidenote: _Pardon._]

The two commissioners, however, were specimens of the best class of Roman
officials, men utterly unlike Lupicinus and Maximus. They marked the
sincere repentance and the agonised prostration of terror which pervaded
all classes in Antioch, and they soon allowed it to appear that their
influence at any rate would be exerted on the side of mercy. Caesarius,
when the enquiry was completed, set off with all speed to Constantinople,
and reached that city on the sixth day after his departure from Antioch.
No Turkish courier probably could now traverse the length and breadth
of Asia Minor in anything like so short a time. Theodosius listened to
the arguments of Caesarius in favour of mercy, to the prayers and sighs
of Bishop Flavianus, who had come to intercede on behalf of his flock,
and granted a complete amnesty, rescinding also his previous decree for
the degradation of Antioch from the rank of capital city. This letter,
carried by a swift messenger to Ellebichus, was by him communicated to
the citizens of Antioch, who received it with shouts of welcome and
tears of joy. Their fifty days of mourning were ended, and Antioch, the
light-hearted Paris of the East, was herself again.

The story of this singular insurrection has been preserved for us by
the orations of the heathen sophist Libanius and by the homilies of the
great Christian preacher, St. John Chrysostom, at that time a priest at
Antioch, afterwards Patriarch of Constantinople.

[Sidenote: _Insurrection of Thessalonica, 390._]

[Sidenote: _Brutal vengeance._]

The insurrection at Antioch displayed the character of Theodosius in a
favourable light, as a strong but merciful and magnanimous ruler of men.
Very different was the effect on his fame of the insurrection which broke
out three years later (390) in the Macedonian city of Thessalonica. A
garrison of Gothic _foederati_ was quartered in this important city.
Already it is probable that many causes of quarrel had arisen between the
Thessalonians and their overbearing but under-educated guests. The wrath
grew to its height when Botheric, the Gothic general, shut up in prison
a certain scoundrel of a charioteer who had vilely insulted him. At the
next races the mob of Thessalonica tumultuously demanded the charioteer’s
liberation, and when Botheric refused, rose in insurrection and slew both
him and several magistrates of the city. There was no such direct insult
to the person of the Emperor as at Antioch, perhaps no such prolonged
period of defiance to authority; but the affair reflected deep disgrace
on the cruel, childish, show-loving Eastern provincials, and if the chief
actors in it had been ordered off to instant execution, Theodosius would
only have acted with praiseworthy severity. But he had now been for
twelve years lord of the world, and the madness which absolute power so
often brings with it had begun to work in his brain. In a frenzy of rage
at the insult offered to himself in the person of his barbarian general,
he sent his orders from Milan (where he was staying when the tidings
reached him) that the whole city of Thessalonica should suffer for the
misdeeds of its ruffianly mob. The soldiers surrounded the circus where
the citizens were assembled, watching the games and unsuspecting of ill.
They closed the gates, marched in amongst the densely-packed spectators,
and began their bloody work. A certain number of heads was ordered to be
brought to the officers, as if they had been thistles or dandelions to be
gathered out of the fields. Was it 7000 as one historian says, or 15,000,
as another? It matters not much: the horror of the thing was the brutal
indiscriminateness of the massacre, the utter absence of any attempt to
separate between the innocent and the guilty, the indifference to human
life, more worthy of Tamerlane and his pyramid of skulls than of an
Emperor of Rome.

[Sidenote: _Penitence of Theodosius._]

It is true that this bloody deed was afterwards repented of in dust and
ashes. The humiliation and penitence of Theodosius, his self-abasement
before the great Christian hero, St. Ambrose, and the forgiveness which
he at last received from him, form a well-known page in church history,
and one which I do not propose now to retrace. But I cannot hold, as
some of the ecclesiastical historians seem to do, that the depth of the
Emperor’s subsequent humility hides the greatness of his crime. That he
should have been even tempted to such a monstrous abuse of his absolute
power, much more that he should have yielded to the temptation, marks
him out as one of the Emperors who were unfit to govern, not only as
immeasurably below a saint like Marcus Aurelius, or a statesman like
Trajan, but almost as fit to be classed in the same category with
Caligula, Nero, and Commodus.

       *       *       *       *       *

We return to our more special subject, the relation between Theodosius
and the _foederati_. Twice he was able to employ his Gothic soldiers with
striking success in the internal struggles of the Empire. The situation
was thus very similar to that which we have seen in our own day in our
Indian Empire, when the Sikhs, the fierce opponents of the English Raj in
1845, became its stalwart defenders in the terrible Mutiny of 1857.

[Sidenote: _Revolt of troops in Britain, 383._]

[Sidenote: _Elevation of Maximus._]

[Sidenote: _Gratian’s faults._]

In the year 383 a military revolt broke out in Britain against the young
Emperor Gratian. Our island was ever the fruitful seed-plot of these
military mutinies. The soldiers, shut up in their camps on our solitary
moors, and deeming themselves cut off from the civilised world[60],
probably exaggerated every hardship of their service, and welcomed any
change which would take them southwards, were it even in the track of
an usurper and a tyrant. Perhaps, too, there was something then as now
in the disposition of the Celts by whom they were surrounded, and with
whom many of them had intermarried, favourable to anarchy and fatal to
that reverence for law and discipline which is needed to hold together
either an army or a state. Whatever the cause, the army revolted and
proclaimed Magnus Clemens Maximus, Emperor. He was, like Theodosius,
a native of Spain, and though harsh and perhaps rapacious, a man of
ability and experience, not unworthy of the purple if he had come to it
by lawful means[61]. Gratian on his side had evidently given some real
cause for dissatisfaction to his subjects. Ammianus, who was a good
judge of character, says of him that ‘while the youthful down was yet
on his cheeks he showed promise of emulating the best of the Emperors,
if he had not given his mind too much to sport, and under the influence
of frivolous companions followed too much the example of Commodus in
his dissipation though not in his cruelty. He delighted to pierce the
greatest possible number of beasts before the eyes of the people, and
when he had given a fatal wound to each one of a hundred lions let loose
from many doors all round the amphitheatre (not needing to hit any beast
twice), he would exult as if he were something more than man. Thus he
would spend whole days within these vast preserves which were called
_vivaria_, slaying savage beasts with his multitudinous arrows. And this
at a time when even the patient earnestness of a Marcus Aurelius would
have been all too little for the sad necessities of the Empire[62].’

[Sidenote: _383-7._]

But there was another grievance besides Gratian’s love for sport, and
that was his fondness for the barbarians. He, too, like Theodosius, had
his petted barbarian guard, but instead of being Goths they belonged to
the less civilised race of the Alani. We are told by another author[63]
‘that Gratian neglected the army and preferred a few of the Alans, whom
by lavish pay he had attracted to his service, to the old Roman soldiery,
and was so fascinated by the companionship, and one might almost say
friendship of these barbarians, that he sometimes on the march even
adopted their dress. By all this he aroused the hatred of the soldiers
against himself.’

[Sidenote: _Death of Gratian._]

An Emperor of barbarians, an Emperor who was spending his days in
shooting wild beasts while the Empire was languishing under taxes within
and the attacks of savages from without,—that was the aspect which, with
many noble and loveable qualities, Gratian bore to his Western subjects:
and hence it was that when Maximus with the army of Britain landed in
Gaul, he shook down the fabric of his power without difficulty. Gratian,
finding himself deserted by his troops, escaped from the battle-field,
but was overtaken and killed at Lyons.

[Sidenote: _Maximus dethrones Valentinian II, 387._]

For more than four years Maximus, satisfied with ruling over the three
great Western provinces which had fallen to the share of Gratian,
maintained at any rate the appearance of harmony with his two colleagues,
and the CONCORDIA AUGGG was still capable of being commemorated on the
Imperial medals. At length, in the autumn of 387, Maximus deemed that
the time had come for grasping the whole Empire of the West. Lulling
to sleep the suspicions of Valentinian and his mother by embassies and
protestations of friendship, he crossed the Alps with an army and marched
towards Aquileia, where the young Emperor was then dwelling in order to
be as near as possible to the dominions of his friendly colleague and
protector. Valentinian did not await the approach of his rival, but going
down to the port of Grado, took ship and sailed for Thessalonica, his
mother and sisters accompanying him.

[Sidenote: _Valentinian’s appeal for help to Theodosius._]

The Emperor and the Senate of Constantinople met the Imperial fugitives
at Thessalonica, and discussed the present position of affairs. The
Senate seconded the entreaties of Valentinian and his mother, and cried
out for vengeance on the murderer of one Emperor and the despoiler of
another. Theodosius, who was sincerely averse to war, as his detractors
said through indolence, but more probably through that knowledge of the
risks and miseries of war which even the most successful general cannot
fail to acquire, spoke in favour of peace, and then of course all warlike
views were hushed.

Upon this Justina, who was the widow of two Emperors[64], and in whose
countenance still lingered the traces of the extraordinary beauty which
had fascinated Valentinian I, fell on her knees before Theodosius and
besought him not to allow the murder of Gratian to remain unavenged, nor
the family of his former benefactor to be utterly ruined. And then she
pointed to her daughter Galla,

    ‘Matre pulchra filia pulchrior,’

who was bathed in tears, lamenting the misfortunes of her house. What
the entreaties of the mother might have failed to effect, the tears of
the daughter accomplished. Theodosius, whose wife Flaccilla had died two
years before (385), took Galla for his second wife, and vowed to avenge
her wrongs and replace her brother on the throne.

[Sidenote: _Civil War between Theodosius and Maximus, 388._]

[Sidenote: _Defeat and death of Maximus. 28 July, 388._]

He was some time in preparing for the campaign, but, when it was opened,
he conducted it with vigour and decision. His troops pressed up the Save
valley, defeated those of Maximus in two engagements, entered Aemona
(Laybach) in triumph, and soon stood before the walls of Aquileia,
behind which Maximus was sheltering himself. The city was a strong and
almost impregnable one, but a mutiny among the troops of Maximus did
away with the necessity for a siege. The soldiers of Theodosius poured
into the city, whose gates had been opened to them by the mutineers,
and dragged off the usurper, barefooted, with tied hands, in slave’s
attire, to the tribunal of Theodosius and his young brother-in-law at the
third milestone from the city. After Theodosius had in a short harangue
reproached him with the evil deeds which he had wrought against the Roman
commonwealth, he handed him over to the executioner, by whom he was at
once put to death.

There can be little doubt that the rapid and successful movements of
Theodosius in this campaign were due in part to the well-trained valour
of his _foederati_. We have, however, a more distinct allusion to their
services in the next civil war, which was fought six years afterwards on
almost the same battle-ground.

[Sidenote: _Valentinian II restored in the West._]

[Sidenote: _His factotum Arbogast._]

[Sidenote: _392. Quarrels between Valentinian and Arbogast._]

On the overthrow of Maximus, Theodosius had with generous magnanimity
handed over to Valentinian II the whole of the Western Empire, both, his
own especial share and that which had formerly been held by his brother
Gratian. The young Emperor was now seventeen years of age: his mother,
Justina, had died apparently on the eve of Theodosius’s victory, and
he governed, or tried to govern, alone. He seems to have taken up his
residence at Trier, the defence of the Gaulish provinces being doubtless
recognised as at this time the chief duty of an Emperor of the West.
But the actual functions of supreme ruler were discharged, not by this
young and somewhat pliable Emperor, but by a Frankish veteran who stood
beside his throne, moving legions and appointing and displacing generals
at his will. I mentioned that during the sickness of Theodosius the war
in Thrace was successfully conducted by two Frankish lieutenants of
Gratian, by name Bauto and Arbogast. Bauto died about the year 385, and
from that time onwards supreme power in the dominions of Valentinian had
been more and more accumulating itself in the hands of the other great
Frankish general, Arbogast, a man adored by his soldiers for his valour
and experience in war, and for his noble disdain of riches. This man was
apparently true to the Empire, true at first in his own rough way to
the house of Valentinian. He had followed the young Emperor to exile,
and after the victory at Aemona it was his hand that deprived the young
Victor, son of the usurper, of life. But knowing his infinite superiority
in all the arts of war and government to the young Adonis who was
nominally his master, he took no pains to conceal that superiority, and
sometimes in the council chamber itself openly opposed and scoffed at
the proposals of the Emperor. In short, this Frankish warrior was already
anticipating by three centuries the attitude of the Frankish Mayors of
the Palace towards the Merovingian monarchs. At length Valentinian,
unable to bear the barbarian’s insolence any longer, one day when he
was sitting on his imperial throne, summoning up as much sternness as
he could into his boyish countenance, presented Arbogast with a written
dismissal from his command as _Magister Equitum_. With calm contempt
Arbogast tore the paper in pieces. ‘You never gave me this command,’
said he, ‘nor will you be able to take it from me.’ Valentinian drew a
sword against the general as he turned to depart, but the attendant to
whom it belonged checked him from using it. Hearing the struggle Arbogast
returned and asked what the Emperor had been trying to do. ‘To slay
myself,’ moaned the miserable Valentinian, ‘because although Emperor I
have no power[65].’

[Sidenote: _Death of Valentinian II, 15 May, 392._]

From this day there was open enmity between Valentinian and his Master of
the Horse: and not long after, when the young Emperor was bathing in the
Rhone, near Vienne, some of the servants of Arbogast, in the absence of
his body-guard who had gone away to dinner, rushed upon him and strangled
him. They then tied a handkerchief round his neck and hung him to a tree,
that it might appear that he had committed suicide. It was generally
understood, however, that the death of Valentinian was in truth the deed
of Arbogast.

[Sidenote: _Eugenius Emperor, 392-394._]

[Sidenote: _Death of Galla, 394._]

The Frankish general, who durst not shock the prejudices of the Roman
world by himself assuming the purple, hung that dishonoured robe upon the
shoulders of a rhetorician, a confidant, and almost a dependent of his
own, named Eugenius. This man, like most of the scholars and rhetoricians
of the day, had not abjured the old faith of Hellas. As Arbogast also
was a heathen, though worshipping Teutonic rather than Olympian gods,
this last revolution looked like a recurrence to the days of Julian,
and threatened the hardly-won supremacy of Christianity. Thus not only
the sad voice of his wife Galla pleading for vengeance on her brother’s
murderers, but, even more, the pious exhortations of all Christian
bishops called on Theodosius to rescue the Western Empire from the hands
of the sophist and the barbarian. Yet his preparations had to be long
and careful, for he was aware that in Arbogast he would meet a general
who knew as much of the art of war as himself, perhaps we might say
that he should meet the greatest captain of the age. He left not Thrace
till June, 394, nearly two years after the death of Valentinian, and
meanwhile, on the very eve of his departure his young wife Galla died,
leaving a little daughter, whose name afterwards was famous in the story
of the Empire, Galla Placidia.

[Sidenote: _Theodosius marches against Eugenius. 394._]

Giving but one day to sorrow and the next to vengeance, Theodosius
marched north-westwards, as before, up the valley of the Save, and to
the city of Aemona. Not there did he meet his foes, but at a place about
thirty miles off, half-way between Aemona and Aquileia, where the Julian
Alps are crossed, and where a little stream called the Frigidus (now the
Wipbach) burst suddenly from a limestone hill. Here, then, the battle
was joined between Eugenius with his Frankish patron and Theodosius with
his 20,000 Gothic _foederati_[66] and the rest of the army of the East.
Gainas, Saul, Bacurius, Alaric were the chief leaders of the Teutonic
troops.

[Sidenote: _Battle of the Frigidus, 5 and 6 Sept. 394._]

[Sidenote: _Death of Eugenius and Arbogast._]

The first day of battle fell heavily on the _foederati_ of Theodosius,
half of whom were left dead upon the field. It seemed as if the West
were going once more to triumph over the East, as if heathenism might
even once more gain the ascendant over Christianity. That night,
however, in prayer Theodosius had a vision of the Apostles John and
Philip, who cheered him on with the assurance of victory. Next day
Theodosius succeeded in detaching part of the army of his rival from
their allegiance; and even the elements seemed eager to aid his victory.
The impetuous _Bora_, a wind well known in that region, sprang up from
the hills in the rear of his army and carried their arrows and their
javelins with resistless force into the ranks of the enemy, whose own
missiles recoiled helplessly on themselves. The battle was won after a
terrible struggle. Eugenius was taken prisoner and carried bound into the
presence of Theodosius, who upbraided him with his heathenism and his
share in the murder of Valentinian. While he was grovelling at the proud
conqueror’s feet and begging for mercy, a soldier cut off his head and
carried it round the field of battle on a pole to show the vanquished
army that their Emperor was slain. Arbogast wandered about for some days
among the rugged mountain-defiles, and then fell upon his sword and
perished.

[Sidenote: _Death of Theodosius, 17 Jan. 395._]

Theodosius, who was still in the prime of life, had now indeed ‘the rule
of the world,’ without a rival or a colleague except his own boyish sons.
The Church and the federated Goths, two of the most powerful forces in
the Empire, were both devotedly attached to him; and the Provincials,
though groaning under the weight of the taxes which he imposed, feared,
and perhaps admired him. Had his life been prolonged as it well might
have been for twenty or thirty years longer, many things might have gone
differently in the history of the world. But, little more than four
months after the victory of the Frigidus, Theodosius died of dropsy at
Milan, his constitution being prematurely worn out by the hardships of
his last campaign, and possibly by the high feasting and revelry which
had resounded through his palace at Constantinople. He had probably not
yet completed his fiftieth year.

[Sidenote: _Character of Theodosius._]

The character of Theodosius is one of the most perplexing in history.
The Church historians have hardly a word of blame for him except in the
matter of the massacre of Thessalonica, and that, as has been said, seems
to be almost atoned for in their eyes by its perpetrator’s penitent
submission to ecclesiastical censure. On the other hand, the heathen
historians, represented by Zosimus, condemn in the most unmeasured
terms his indolence, his love of pleasure, his pride, and hint at
the scandalous immorality of his life. Varying a similar saying with
reference to Constantine, we might say that he who believes all the evil
that is said of Theodosius by Socrates, and all the good that is said of
him by Zosimus, will not go far wrong. But this takes us only a little
way, for the blame and the praise are both infinitesimal.

He had one great work to do, the reconciliation of the Goths to the
Empire, and he did that work well. It is perhaps unfair to judge of it by
the slenderness of its permanent results, since his early death may have
been the chief cause of its failure. But he was certainly passionate,
egotistic, cruel. He spared not the pockets of his subjects, and his
reign, like a heavy wheat-crop, exhausted the energies of his Empire. It
is the fashion to call him the Great, and we may admit that he has as
good a right to that title as Louis XIV, a monarch whom in some respects
he pretty closely resembles. But it seems to me that it would be safer
to withhold this title from both sovereigns, and to call them, not the
Great, but the _Magnificent_.




LECTURE V.

ALARIC.


[Sidenote: _Arcadius and Honorius, sons of Theodosius._]

[Sidenote: _Their incapacity._]

On the death of Theodosius (395) his two sons, Arcadius and Honorius,
aged respectively eighteen and ten, succeeded to ‘the rule of the world,’
Arcadius dwelling at Constantinople and ruling the Eastern portion, while
the Western fell to the share of Honorius, who at this time generally
dwelt at Milan. Arcadius died in the year 408, at the age of thirty-one;
Honorius in 423, at the age of thirty-nine. These two men were thus
nominally at the head of human affairs during some of the most profoundly
interesting and important events that have happened in the history of the
world; yet few men have ever by their own force of character or strength
of intellect exercised less influence on the destinies of the human race.
Theodosius, with all his faults, interests the student of his reign: he
was brilliant, forceful, and he makes a mark on the history of his time.
The dulness of his sons’ characters is so portentous, that after the
lapse of a millennium and a half the Muse of History still yawns at the
remembrance of them. Arcadius had a beautiful Frankish wife, and left a
son of artistic temperament, and four pious daughters. Honorius married
his deceased wife’s sister and left no family, but was fond of keeping
pigeons. These are pretty nearly all the facts that it is possible to
ascertain or to remember out of the drizzling dulness of their personal
history.

[Sidenote: _Administration of Rufinus and Stilicho._]

Theodosius, who probably saw the weakness of character of his sons, and
who was leaving them at an age when even strong and capable natures would
have required much help and guidance, entrusted the guardianship of the
lads, and the virtual regency of the Empire, to Rufinus and Stilicho. The
former, with the rank of Praetorian Prefect, administered the realm of
Arcadius; the latter, as _Magister Utriusque Militiae_, governed the army
and the people of Honorius.

These two men resembled one another in one quality—an inordinate love
of money, whether justly or unjustly acquired. In all other respects
their characters were utterly dissimilar. Stilicho, though grasping and
perhaps somewhat coarse-fibred, was a hero and a patriot; Rufinus (whom
we unfortunately know only by the descriptions of his bitter enemies) may
have had some administrative ability, but must have been a bad specimen
even of the corrupt bureaucracy of Constantinople.

Dissimilar as was the character of the two men, so also was their origin
and training. Stilicho was apparently of pure Teutonic extraction, the
son of a Vandal chief who had commanded some barbarian auxiliaries in the
army of the Emperor Valens. His tall and handsome presence had commended
him to the favour of Serena, the favourite niece and trusted counsellor
of Theodosius. His marriage with so near a relative of the Emperor
naturally led to his speedy promotion. His employment on an embassy
to the Persian king was followed by high military command. He showed
indisputable talents for war in several campaigns against the barbarians,
and, some years before the death of Theodosius, was raised to the
highest of all military dignities—that of _Magister Utriusque Militiae_
(Commander-in-Chief of Infantry and Cavalry).

Of the early life of Rufinus we know but little. He was born at Elusa, a
little town in the south-west corner of Gaul. He went to Constantinople,
and there, by his obsequiousness, his perseverance, and doubtless also
by his aptitude for the work of administration, succeeded in climbing
from step to step of the official ladder. One or two old and faithful
servants of the Empire (Tatianus and Proculus) who stood above him in
rank, were cast down by his well-timed accusations of disloyalty, and
at length the obscure Gaulish Provincial blazed forth to the world as
Praetorian Prefect of the East—one of the wealthiest men in the Empire,
a man who aspired to wear the diadem himself as colleague of Arcadius,
and to obtain the Emperor’s hand in marriage for his daughter. Thus while
Stilicho’s might be said to be the typical career of a robust, handsome,
and warlike Teuton in the service of the Empire, the career of Rufinus
was the equally typical career of a clever, pushing, and unscrupulous
Provincial.

[Sidenote: _Divergence between East and West._]

Between the two administrators of the realm—Rufinus and Stilicho—there
was no cordiality, no chance of well-concerted action for the good of
the Empire. In fact, quite independently of the personal characters of
the two men, the interests of the two divisions of the Empire were now
beginning manifestly to diverge. The older Rome looked down upon the new
Rome by the Bosphorus as a mere Greek city, the home of sophists and
chatterers; while Constantinople regarded the city of the Tiber, with
its mouldering palaces, its desolate Campagna, its still half-heathen
Senate, as a great stranded hulk, unfit any longer to bear the precious
freight of Empire. This divergence between the hopes and wishes of the
East and West, a divergence which was often on the point of becoming
actual hostility, was wider for the first fifteen years after the death
of Theodosius than for a considerable time before or after that interval,
and promoted not a little the success of the barbarian movement against
the Roman State.

[Sidenote: _Alaric King of the Visigoths._]

That movement began very shortly after Theodosius was laid in his
grave. It was in all probability in the spring of the year 395 that the
Visigoths in Moesia raised the young Alaric upon a shield, and with
joyful shouts acclaimed him as their king. We have already noticed this
young Gothic chief as commanding a troop in the army of Theodosius at
the battle of the Frigidus, and that is in fact all that we know about
him up to this date, except that he was born (probably between 360 and
370) in the island of Peuce at the mouth of the Danube, and that he was
either himself surnamed Baltha (the Bold), or belonged to a clan of kings
or chieftains who bore that name. As the Gothic historian says: ‘As soon
as Alaric was created king, deliberating with his people he persuaded
them rather by their own labour to seek for kingdoms than quietly to
lie down in subjection to strangers.’ In other words he decided, and
persuaded them to decide, to abandon the easy but inglorious position
of _foederati_, and cutting themselves loose from the old and decaying
Empire, to hew out new realms for themselves with their own trusty
broadswords. Towards this decision he was no doubt partly guided by what
he had himself seen, when in the Imperial service, of the weakness of
the legions, the unwarlike character of the Provincials of the Empire,
the oppressions of the tax-gatherers which caused even the barbarians to
seem welcome as deliverers from their yoke; above all by what he, and
every officer of rank in the Roman army, knew of the discord and jealousy
between the two chief ministers of the Empire.

[Sidenote: _395._]

The first blows of Alaric and his Goths were struck at the Eastern
Empire. This was natural enough, since they were themselves settled
within it: but there was another reason for the choice. The army which
Theodosius had led with him across the Julian Alps seems not to have been
dismissed to its Eastern cantonments during the few months between the
battle of the Frigidus and his death. It and the troops of Eugenius were
now all collected in the north of Italy under the orders of Stilicho,
who was thus in another than the official sense _Magister Utriusque
Militiae_, since both the conquering and the conquered army of the late
campaign received the watchword from him. A singular position certainly,
and one which excuses some things otherwise difficult to justify in the
conduct of Arcadius and his minister.

[Sidenote: _Alaric strikes at the Eastern Empire._]

[Sidenote: _Stilicho forbidden to repel the invasion._]

[Sidenote: _Alaric in Greece._]

Alaric, then, with his Gothic followers marched first towards
Constantinople. Perhaps he had some hopes of taking the city by surprise,
but if so he was disappointed. Rufinus, who, Provincial as he was,
professed a certain fondness for the barbarians and imitated their dress
and accoutrements, seems to have sought an interview with the Gothic
king, and suggested to him that instead of undertaking a hopeless siege
he would do well to turn his steps southwards, where he would reap
abundance of spoil from the still undevastated plains of Greece. Alaric
accepted the suggestion, and marched through Macedonia into Thessaly.
There, however, his course was stayed for a while by the arrival of
Stilicho, who, loyally fulfilling the behest of the dying Theodosius,
had come with an army to deliver the invaded Empire from its foe. Before
manœuvres had ceased and hard fighting had begun, there came a strange,
and at first sight incomprehensible, message from the Eastern Court:
‘Let Stilicho withdraw the legions of Honorius within the limits of
his master’s Empire, and let the legions of the East be sent to their
proper quarters at Constantinople.’ Loyally, but sadly, Stilicho obeyed
the command, and thus the campaign of 395 closed, leaving Alaric in
undisputed possession of the Greek peninsula. No Leonidas with his Three
Hundred defended now Thermopylae, not even the easily held Isthmus of
Corinth was occupied by troops. All over the sacred places of Grecian
story, Delphi, Corinth, Argos, Sparta, the tall barbarians swarmed.
Only Athens seems to have escaped comparatively unharmed, a deliverance
which the heathen historian[67] attributes to the fact that when Alaric
approached the city he saw Athene Promachus, in such guise as she is
represented in her statue, going round about its towers, and Achilles,
the hero, such as Homer painted him in his wrath for the death of
Patroclus, standing before the walls. Those who doubt the truth of these
apparitions may accept the theory that the Acropolis was too strong to be
taken, and that Alaric, who was no mere barbarous destroyer, was induced,
partly by a heavy ransom and partly by reverence for her old renown, to
refrain from sacking a city which was illustrious and venerable rather
than wealthy or strategically important.

[Sidenote: _March of the recalled troops to Constantinople._]

Meanwhile the troops which had been ordered to Constantinople, and which
were commanded by Gainas the Goth, had done a strange and fearful deed.
They loved Stilicho, and cursed the order issued by the officials at
Constantinople which parted them from his standards. Everywhere, as they
marched through the Empire they heard execrations against the avarice and
arrogance of the Gaulish upstart, who presumed, forsooth, to put himself
forward as a suitable colleague for the Emperor. And, most important of
all, their leader, Gainas the Goth, aspired to play at Constantinople the
same part which Stilicho the Vandal was playing at Milan. The soldiers
said to one another that when Rufinus met them at Constantinople he
should have a reception that he little expected.

[Sidenote: _The review._]

When they reached the Capital they were drawn up in a great plain near
the city, and Arcadius, with Rufinus by his side, came thither to review
them. The two stood upon a high platform, conspicuous to all, and those
who were nearest could see Rufinus plucking the Emperor’s mantle and
evidently desiring him to fulfil some promise which he had made and to
utter some oration to the army. In this oration, could it have been
delivered, the simple-minded Arcadius, who would have done anything
which his minister commanded, was to have presented Rufinus to the army
as his colleague in the Empire. Then, had the programme been fulfilled,
the soldiers would have clashed their swords upon their shields and
shouted ‘Ave Imperator’: the minister would have come forward and offered
them a liberal donative, and Rufinus Augustus would have struck his
coins commemorating his Justice, his Temperance, and the Concord of the
Emperors.

[Sidenote: _Death of Rufinus._]

Such was the programme of the day’s proceedings, but what actually
occurred was very different from this. While the promised oration was
still lingering on the lips of the scared and helpless Emperor, the army
stretched forth both its wings and folded the high tribunal in a narrower
and ever narrower embrace. Threatening gestures were made, and murmurs,
not of acclamation, were heard. Soon the dreadful truth flashed upon
Rufinus that he was surrounded, not by friends eager to be his subjects,
but by enemies thirsting for his blood. A soldier stepped forth from the
ranks, and mounting the platform, thrust him through with his sword,
saying, ‘With this sword Stilicho strikes thee.’ Then the barbarians and
the barbarised Roman soldiers carried the head of Rufinus round the city
on a pole, strewed his limbs in fragments over the fields, and showed to
every passer-by the dead hand opening and closing upon imaginary coins,
while his mock courtiers shouted ‘Give, give to the Insatiable.’

Even the heavy soul of Arcadius must have felt some stirrings of horror
and resentment at such a tragedy enacted in his own sacred presence, but
he passed at once under the dominion of other masters whose fortunes
we cannot here follow. Gainas the Goth, Eutropius the Eunuch, Eudoxia
the beautiful Empress, daughter of the Frankish general Bauto, kept up
a vivid game of Court intrigue, and disputed with varying success for
the chief place in that empty chamber which represented the mind of the
Emperor.

[Sidenote: _396. Second campaign of Stilicho against Alaric, 396._]

We return to Alaric and his invasion of the Peloponnesus. Any dreams
which he may have nourished of establishing his kingdom by the banks
of the Eurotas or Cephissus were dispelled by the second appearance of
Stilicho, who, this time apparently at the earnest request of Arcadius,
brought the army of Honorius for the deliverance of Greece. No great
battle was fought, but Stilicho, who was evidently a great master of
strategy, penned up his antagonist in the valleys of Arcadia. From this
difficult position, however, he allowed him to escape, whether through
mere carelessness, through fear of driving a powerful foe to despair, by
a tacit agreement that if liberated he should at once evacuate Greece,
or from what other motive it is impossible now to say. The enemies
of Stilicho always asserted that both on this and other occasions he
refrained from crushing Alaric when he had the power to do so, in order
that he, as the only general who could successfully cope with him, might
never find his services superfluous.

[Sidenote: _Alaric as Roman governor of Illyricum. 396-400._]

On evacuating Greece, Alaric with his Goths did not relapse into the
position of a Fritigern or an Athanaric. Another plan for the future had
now opened itself before him. As the time was not yet come for conquering
kingdoms he would accept once more, in seeming, the position of a captain
of _foederati_, but in such circumstances as to be still practically
independent of the Empire. The part of the Prefecture of Illyricum which
had fallen to the share of Arcadius consisted in its northern portion
of the so-called Diocese of Dacia, nearly corresponding to the present
kingdoms of Servia and Bosnia. Over this eastern Illyricum Alaric was
placed as governor by the ministers of Arcadius. The precise official
title which he bore is not mentioned. He may have been _Vicarius Daciae_
or _Dux Daciae et Moesiae Primae_: but his power is undoubted. For the
next four or five years he wielded all the enormous powers, both civil
and military, of a Roman Imperial governor. He enlisted recruits, he
managed arsenals, he collected taxes, though what proportion of the taxes
so collected found its way into the Treasury of Byzantium no historian
has told us.

[Sidenote: _Advantages of this position._]

The especial advantage to Alaric of his position in this corner of
Illyricum was that it enabled him to profit to the full by the discord
existing between the two sections of the Empire, and at his pleasure to
threaten either. He could with almost equal ease move southwards upon
Macedon and Thrace and threaten Constantinople, or north-westwards to the
Julian Alps, and so descend into Italy. This advantage is emphatically
alluded to by a contemporary poet[68], who represents Stilicho as saying
of him—

    ‘Discord ’twixt East and West and mutual wrong,
    Not his own strength, has shielded him so long;
    While he, deceitful, pledged his faith to both,
    And sold to each by turns his perjured oath.’

Yet doubtless during these years of repose his thoughts were turning with
increased frequency to the West rather than to the East. He knew, none
better, the matchless strength of the situation of Constantinople. He
suspected, if he did not know, the comparative weakness of Rome. Moesia
and Thrace had been wandered over for years by the wasting bands of his
countrymen, while Italy, so long the wealthy mistress of the world, was
still unravaged. Above all he had already begun to hear a voice—like that
which other makers of history, beings such as Mohammed, Joan of Arc,
Savonarola listened to—telling them of great deeds set before them which
they should one day accomplish. And this voice—call it by what name we
may, it is vouched for by contemporary evidence _before_ its prediction
was accomplished—said ever in his ears, ‘Alaric, delay not. Thou shalt
penetrate to the City’[69]—the awful and still inviolate majesty of Rome.

[Sidenote: _Alaric’s first invasion of Italy, 400-403._]

At length in the year 400 the thunder-cloud burst. Alaric, with the
whole nation which obeyed him, the women and children in the great
Gothic waggons, the warriors on their war-horses, moved slowly up the
valley of the Save, crossed the Julian Alps, and by the way which he had
learned when he rode in the train of Theodosius, descended upon Italy.
At the same time, there is reason to think, another troop of Goths,
possibly belonging to the Ostrogothic section of the people, entered
Italy under the leadership of Radagaisus, but of their movements we have
no information, and even the fact of their invasion is not generally
admitted by historians.

Of the three or four years (400-403) that Alaric spent in Italy during
this invasion, we have the slenderest and most tantalisingly imperfect
information from our authorities. We can say certainly that he did not
reach Rome, probably did not cross the Apennines. There are dim rumours
of a battle, a Roman defeat, somewhere near Aquileia. Then there is an
inexplicable delay. During the whole of the year 401 Alaric appears to
linger in Venetia and the valley of the Po, while Stilicho is fighting
with some enemies (possibly Radagaisus and his Ostrogoths) in Raetia, and
drawing in troops from the Rhine, and even from Britain, for the defence
of the menaced capital. It was at this time that the Twentieth Legion was
withdrawn from the cantonments which it had for centuries occupied at
Chester, but to which it never returned.

[Sidenote: _Honorius retires to Ravenna._]

[Sidenote: _402-752._]

The Emperor Honorius seems to have been besieged by Alaric either at
Milan or the not distant city of Asta. If thus menaced, he at any rate
sustained no actual injury; but the shock to his Imperial nerves of
seeing the yellow-haired barbarians under the walls of his city had been
so severe that he migrated to Ravenna, which strong city, effectually
sheltered from every land-attack by the network of rivers and canals
which surrounded it, was from henceforth for three centuries and a half
the regular residence of Roman Emperors, Ostrogothic Kings, and Byzantine
Exarchs.

[Sidenote: _Battle of Pollentia. 4 Apr. 402._]

At last, at Eastertide in the year 402, the armies of Stilicho and Alaric
met in battle at Pollentia, a city of what is now Piedmont, about
twenty miles south-east of Turin. The accounts of the battle are very
conflicting, but it was probably a defeat, though not a decisive defeat,
of the Goths. The advantage was gained by a piece of sharp practice which
was hardly worthy of the troops of a Christian Emperor. It was Good
Friday, and Alaric—an Arian, but a zealous Christian—was celebrating
the great event of Calvary in the usual manner, and not dreaming of
battles, when one of Stilicho’s officers, an Alan and a heathen, named
Saulus, led an impetuous charge of cavalry against the Gothic army, and
compelled it to turn from prayer to fighting. Saulus himself fell at the
very beginning of the engagement, and the cavalry wavered; but Stilicho
and the legions of the centre restored the battle, and, perhaps, won
the victory. But that the barbarian should have been forced against his
will to fight on the most solemn fast-day of the Christian calendar was
accounted a blot on the fair fame of Stilicho, and was not forgotten when
the day of reckoning came between him and his enemies at the Imperial
Court.

[Sidenote: _Alaric retires from Italy, 403._]

[Sidenote: _406._]

Another defeat, a doubtful defeat, of the Goths at Verona seems to have
ended the war. In the year 403 Alaric made his way back out of Italy,
probably over the Brenner Pass. He had not this time ‘penetrated to
the City’: he had lost some of his treasure, the spoils of preceding
years, and, according to one account, his wife even had fallen into
the enemy’s hands. In itself the expedition had proved fruitless and
inglorious enough, but it was the parent of mighty results; for doubtless
in consequence of the withdrawal of the Imperial forces from the Rhine,
a multitude of barbarous hordes—Vandals, Alans, and Suevi—poured from
Germany into Gaul, and that fair province, the keystone of the arch of
the Western Prefecture, was henceforward virtually lost to the Empire.

[Sidenote: _Invasion of Radagaisus, 405._]

[Sidenote: _Radagaisus shut up near Fiesole._]

[Sidenote: _Radagaisus slain and his army sold into slavery._]

Two years after Alaric’s departure from Italy, his confederate Radagaisus
returned to it, having 200,000 Goths (probably Ostrogoths) in his
train. This man was spoken of with terror as ‘by far the most savage
of all the ancient or modern enemies of Rome.’ He was a Pagan, and a
rumour was spread abroad that he had vowed to offer to his country’s
savage gods the blood of the whole Roman people as an acceptable
drink-offering. The impending heathenism without gave a despairing
courage to the yet unsubdued heathenism within. The little knot of
senators and their clients who still adhered to the ancient faith (which
died out more slowly in Rome than anywhere else) dared to lift up their
voices and openly assert that all these troubles were coming upon
the State because she had left her old moorings, and because Jupiter
Capitolinus and his family of gods were no longer receiving their
ancient honours. However, there was not time for this party to effect
a religious counter-revolution before deliverance came. If Radagaisus
actually appeared under the walls of the City (which is doubtful), he
soon departed and marched northwards into the rich land of Etruria.
Stilicho followed him with an army, in which Uldin the Hun and Sarus
the Goth were conspicuous figures. Once again he played that clever
strategic game which he had probably learnt from Theodosius, and which
he had already twice successfully practised against Alaric in Greece and
in Italy. He ‘shut him up,’ we are told, in that circle of mountains
which surrounds Fiesole and looks down on Florence. Skilfully-posted
detachments of troops prevented the savage invaders from piercing at any
point through the iron girdle that encompassed them; and this result
being satisfactorily attained, of course the hugeness of the host only
hastened the inevitable surrender. While the wild horde of Ostrogoths
were starving in famished Fiesole, the soldiers of Stilicho were living
in comfort—feasting, gaming, singing their rough camp-songs—but a
sufficient number of them ever watching that none of the barbarians
should creep over the mountains and escape. Before long the end came.
Radagaisus, trying to steal forth by himself from the trap into which he
and his followers had fallen, stumbled upon one of Stilicho’s outposts,
was brought before his conqueror, and, after a few days’ interval, was
put to death. The multitude which had accompanied him into Italy, with
proud dreams of conquest and plunder, surrendering themselves at last
to their watchful enemies, were all sold as slaves. So glutted was the
market by their numbers that thousands of them fetched no more than an
_aureus_ (twelve shillings) apiece. But so long had the brave Teutons
delayed their surrender, that even the food which their new masters gave
them came, in the majority of cases, too late to save their lives; and
the greedy purchaser found in thousands of instances that his _aureus_
procured for him only the obligation to bury a starved-out Ostrogoth.

[Sidenote: _Nature of the manœuvre by which Radagaisus was defeated._]

The fact that both Theodosius and the captain who had been formed in his
school practised so often and so triumphantly this manœuvre of ‘shutting
up’ the Goths suggests a question as to the reason of its success.
We must remember that the armies which followed Fritigern, Alaric,
and Radagaisus were, for the most part, _nation-armies_, encumbered
with women and children, old men and other non-combatants, for whose
conveyance a long train of waggons was needed. The Goths had no doubt
some horses, since we hear of their cavalry, but they do not seem to have
been essentially an equestrian nation; and their cavalry evidently lacked
rapidity and nimbleness of movement, which was the cause of their defeat
by the Huns.

[Sidenote: _408._]

So long as they could confine themselves to the great plains of the
Danube and the Po, the overpowering numbers of this human torrent made
them terrible and victorious; and even the waggons were useful, since
when formed in square they made a rough but safe encampment. But when
the time came for this nation-army to penetrate from one river-system
to another, to cross the soaring range of the Balkans or the Apennines,
then their difficulties began. Their deficiency of light cavalry
prevented them from reconnoitring well their ground, and obtaining
(in those mapless days) the much-needed information as to the easiest
passes and the most fruitful valleys. Soon there would be stragglers
from the main host, and then petty and harassing skirmishes to defend
those stragglers. The great cumbrous waggons would stick in morasses.
There would be night-alarms, and in the stampede of cattle and flying
men, many would be dashed down precipitous ravines or swallowed up in
swollen rivers. By gentle but judicious pressure the Imperial general
would succeed in forcing the unwieldy procession into some bay among the
mountains carefully selected beforehand, whence exit for heavily armed
warriors, for horses and for waggons was only possible by two or three
well-defined passes. Then, if he could only keep strict watch enough, his
task was accomplished. He would station his bravest soldiers, Huns very
likely, or even Gothic _foederati_ on whose fidelity he could depend,
at the mouths of these passes, and wait for hunger to do its swift work
upon the cattle, upon the little children, upon the women; till at length
thousands of brave men who longed for nothing so much as the opportunity
to die fighting, found even this denied them, and had to surrender
themselves and be sold as slaves to cultivate the lands of some Roman
lord whose dainty life one blow from a Gothic fist would have at once
annihilated.

This picture is chiefly an imaginary one[70], but those who remember the
terrible scenes which marked the destruction of the British army in the
Khyber Pass will, I think, recognise its probable truth.

We pass over three years and come to 408. Honorius, who was aged
twenty-three, had now been for thirteen years the nominal ruler of the
West. During the whole of that time the administration of affairs and
the supreme command of armies had been in the hands of Stilicho, who,
notwithstanding some blunders and some crimes, had upon the whole proved
himself equal to the Herculean task which the weight of the falling
Empire had brought upon him, and had certainly by his military genius
marked himself out as the only champion fit to contend successfully
with Alaric. This champion, through a sinister combination of fatuity,
intolerance, and spite, was now struck down by the Emperor himself.

[Sidenote: _Revolt of Constantine in Britain, 407._]

[Sidenote: _408. Negotiations between Stilicho and Alaric._]

The circumstances of the Empire were more than ever difficult and
perplexing. The usual British pretender to the purple had appeared in the
shape of a private soldier named Constantine, whom (chiefly on account
of his distinguished name) the legions still remaining in Britain had
hailed as Imperator, and under whose command they had crossed over into
Gaul to contend for such fragments of that wealthy province as still
remained Roman, amid the generally pervading swarm of Franks, Vandals,
Alans, and Alamanni. In the East the relations with Arcadius had been
growing steadily worse for years. The present subject of contention
was a claim—a preposterous claim as it seems to me—on the part of the
Western Empire for the possession of the whole instead of a mere half
of the Prefecture of Illyricum. In support of this claim Alaric, who
seems to have been in frequent, almost confidential, communication with
Stilicho ever since his last invasion of Italy, had been engaged by that
minister to commence a joint invasion of the Eastern Empire. The project
was, however, abandoned owing to the persuasions of Serena, the wife of
Stilicho, who appears in all good faith to have exerted her influence
with her husband and her Imperial cousins in order to prevent the
outbreak of war between Arcadius and Honorius. But Alaric, dissatisfied
with such a termination of the affair which left him and his followers
without their stipulated guerdon, suddenly appeared at Aemona (Laybach)
in a threatening attitude, and demanded compensation for the trouble
and expense to which he had been put in preparing for the abandoned
expedition.

[Sidenote: _Alaric’s claim for compensation._]

This extraordinary claim was brought by Stilicho before the Senate at
Rome, and was supported by his own voice and by an easily procured
letter from Honorius. Against such powerful advocates who could plead?
The Conscript Fathers decided that 4000 pounds weight of gold (£160,000
sterling) should be paid over to Alaric in consideration of his not
making war on either portion of the Empire. One Senator alone, a man of
high rank named Lampadius, uttered an indignant exclamation[71], ‘This
is no peace, but a selling of ourselves into slavery’; but fearing
punishment for his boldness, when the Senate was broken up he took refuge
in a neighbouring church, the sanctity of whose asylum seems to have
preserved him from punishment[72].

[Sidenote: _Danger of Stilicho’s position._]

It might seem that a minister who could thus impose his will on Emperor
and Senate could do anything, but in fact the position of Stilicho was
already undermined. His daughter Maria, wife of the Emperor, had died,
and the docile Honorius had acquiesced in the command to marry her
sister Thermantia; but it seems possible to discern in his feeble soul
some faint struggles of revolt against the yoke which the Stilichonian
family, especially his mother-in-law, Serena, imposed upon him. In the
legions, the regular Roman part of the army, there was an increasing
feeling of bitterness against the favours shown, doubtless deservedly,
to the Teutonic _foederati_. ‘Count Stilicho,’ they said one to another,
‘is after all a Vandal by birth, Sarus is a Goth, Uldin is a Hun. All
the high commands are being monopolised by men whose fathers were
skin-clothed barbarians. We are Romans, the sons of the comrades of
Romulus, scions of the race that has conquered the world, yet we are
nothing in our own land.’ Side by side with this military discontent,
there was also ecclesiastical dissatisfaction. Stilicho, if not actually
an Arian, pretty certainly threw his influence into the scale against the
persecuting edicts and civil disabilities which the orthodox party were
endeavouring to persuade the Emperor to hurl at the heretics. A rumour
was also spread abroad—the truth or the origin of which it is impossible
now to ascertain—that his son Eucherius shared that devotion to the old
idolatry which, as has been said, lingered on so long among the nobility
of Rome. Whatever the truth of that rumour may have been, another
report which was industriously brought under the notice of Honorius,
that Stilicho was scheming to secure the diadem for his son, was almost
certainly unfounded. In point of fact the great minister had shown
singular moderation in reference to the advancement of this son, who at
this time held only the unimportant office of _Tribunus Notariorum_.

[Sidenote: _Death of Arcadius, 1 May, 408._]

[Sidenote: _Honorius in the camp at Ticinum._]

[Sidenote: _Mutiny at Ticinum._]

Such was already the thunderous state of the atmosphere of the Court
when news reached Ravenna of the death of the Eastern Emperor, Arcadius.
Both Honorius and Stilicho seem to have desired the office of guardian
to the young Theodosius, son of Arcadius, and to have proposed to go
to Constantinople to claim it. Stilicho had not much difficulty in
dissuading the timid and parsimonious Honorius from the dangers and
expense of the journey, but he could not allay the suspicions which his
own eagerness for the office had excited, that he was again striving in
an underhand way to procure either the Eastern or the Western diadem
for the young Pagan, Eucherius. There was a certain officer of the
Imperial guard named Olympius, ‘a man who, under the guise of devotion to
Christianity, concealed every kind of wickedness,’ who was perpetually
whispering into the Emperor’s ear the danger to religion from this
ambition of Stilicho. A camp had been formed at Ticinum (Pavia), for the
soldiers who were to march into Gaul to quell the revolt of Constantine.
To this camp, which seems to have contained a large preponderance of
Roman-born soldiers, Honorius set forth accompanied by Olympius; and
Stilicho, who had thus allowed his most useful instrument to be purloined
from him, lingered in a curious state of irresolution and inactivity with
his _foederati_ round him at Bologna. Soon the news came of a terrible
mutiny of the troops at Ticinum. Olympius had been ingratiating himself
with the soldiers in every possible way, visiting those who were sick,
and on every occasion letting fall words of sympathy for their hardships,
and indignation at the partiality which constantly postponed their
interests to those of the barbarian favourites of Stilicho. These hints,
coming from an officer of the Imperial guard and a manifest favourite of
the Emperor, had produced their natural effect. There had been what in
Spanish politics is called a _pronunciamento_. The soldiers had risen in
rebellion, slain four officers of the highest rank in the army and four
heads of departments in the State, put the magistrates to flight, and
held a carnival of blood in the city, robbing and murdering at their will.

[Sidenote: _Stilicho arrested, and put to death._]

At first the news ran that Honorius himself had been killed in the
tumult, and then the _foederati_ at Bologna urged, and Stilicho
consented, that they should at once march to Ticinum and avenge his
death. Soon, however, a correcter version of the affair was received.
Honorius was not dead, but had been paraded up and down the streets of
the city by Olympius, in a short military cloak and without a diadem,
endeavouring to persuade the soldiers to return to their obedience. In
this he had at length succeeded. The mutiny had been quelled, but the
authors of it had gained their end. All the more powerful friends of
Stilicho at Ticinum had been treacherously slain, and it was now deemed
safe to issue an order for the apprehension of Stilicho himself. The
officers of the _foederati_, when the designs of the Court were apparent,
naturally wished to defend themselves and their great general by force,
but he refused to take any part in such a civil war, ‘not deeming it
honourable or safe to employ barbarians against the Roman army[73].’
Sarus, the Goth, having no sympathy with such scruples, perceiving that
it would, in these circumstances, ruin his prospects of a military career
to be known as an adherent of Stilicho, ungenerously turned against his
old chief, slew the brave Huns who formed his body-guard, and would fain
have captured Stilicho himself, who, however, fled to Ravenna, but even
in the hurry of his own flight found time to warn the neighbouring cities
not to receive the _foederati_ within their walls. Soon after his arrival
came a messenger from Olympius bearing the Emperor’s orders that he was
to be apprehended and imprisoned. Stilicho took refuge in one of the
many churches of Ravenna, but on the soldiers swearing a solemn oath in
the presence of the Bishop that they were ordered to imprison him only
but not to kill him, he surrendered himself to them. At once the same
messenger produced a second letter from the Emperor, denouncing against
Stilicho the punishment of death for his crimes against the Commonwealth.
His friends and servants and a mass of indignant _foederati_ entreated to
be allowed to defend him by arms, but Stilicho sternly forbade them, and
calmly presented his neck to the sword of the executioner (Aug. 22, 408).

Some men who have led apparently righteous and honourable lives are
unmasked by Death, who exposes their well-hidden wickedness. In
Stilicho’s case Death wrought exactly the opposite change. At every step
of his career we ask ourselves the question, ‘Self-seeker or Patriot?’
and it must be confessed that we scarcely get a perfectly satisfactory
answer. But the closing scenes of his life show that he was indeed
true to Rome, and refused the vengeance and the deliverance which lay
all ready to his hand rather than use against her the swords of the
barbarians.

[Sidenote: _Persecution of the friends of Stilicho._]

The death of Stilicho was the signal for an outburst of jealous rage
against his family and friends. Eucherius, who had fled to Rome, was
before long put to death. Thermantia was sent back by Honorius to her
mother. The adherents of Stilicho were tortured to make them confess
his traitorous designs, and when they steadfastly denied the existence
of any such, were beaten to death with cudgels. Above all, the Roman
soldiers, in every city where the wives and children of the _foederati_
were dwelling, rose in riotous insurrection, killing some and plundering
others. Henceforth, of course, there was open war between legionaries and
_foederati_, the latter of whom, to the number of 30,000, streamed forth
to Alaric’s Illyrian camp and urged him to avenge them on their cruel and
cowardly foes.

[Sidenote: _Alaric invades Italy, 408._]

Mindful of his former reverses in Italy, Alaric, though the voice
‘Penetrabis ad Urbem’ was still ringing in his ears, offered peace to
Honorius in exchange for a small sum of money, hostages, and the province
of Pannonia, on which by this time the Empire can have had but a slender
hold. Honorius, safe behind the canals of Ravenna, and relying on the
prayers of Olympius, refused all terms of compromise, and late in this
eventful year, 408, Alaric marched for the last time over the Julian
Alps into Italy, never again to leave that land, the goal of so many
aspirations. The events of the three years, 408-410, in each of which
there was a siege of Rome, cannot here be related with any detail, and
some of them are among the best-known commonplaces of history. I will
only briefly assign to each year its distinguishing features.

[Sidenote: _Rome ransomed, 408._]

The first, 408, was the year of _ransom_. Alaric, as has been said, in
the later months of the year marched into Italy, and did not, as before,
linger in the plains of Lombardy, but struck southward through Picenum
and Umbria, marching no doubt by the great Flaminian Way, and stood
before long at the gates of Rome. There seems to have been no opposition
to his progress. The ‘Roman’ party, so zealous in killing women and
children and in organising _pronunciamentos_, slunk into their holes
when an army appeared. It is probable that in this Italian expedition
Alaric had made his host more of an army and less of a nation than on
the previous occasion. We hear nothing of the waggons, and some of his
marches and counter-marches can hardly have been performed with a long
train of non-combatants following him.

At Alaric’s appearance under their walls the Senate (for Honorius was
safe at Ravenna) could think of no other means of opposing him than
putting the hapless Serena, the widow of Stilicho, to death, fearing
that she might open treacherous communications with the besiegers. The
cowardly deed was not long unpunished. Alaric watched the Tiber above
and below, and drew a strict line of blockade round the city. Hunger and
pestilence were soon raging among the people, and the Senate found itself
compelled to send ambassadors to Alaric to ask his terms. The threat that
despair might drive the citizens to some audacious sortie was met by the
well-known answer, ‘The thicker the hay, the easier mown’: the enquiry
what Alaric meant to leave them if he insisted on their surrendering all
their gold, all their moveable property, and all their barbarian slaves,
by the equally well-known words, ‘Your lives[74].’

More days of famine followed. At length a final embassy arranged the
terms of the ransom which Alaric condescended to receive from the
Imperial City. It consisted of 5000 lbs. weight of gold (£225,000),
30,000 lbs. of silver (£90,000), 4000 silken tunics, 3000 scarlet hides,
and 3000 lbs. of pepper. The date of this transaction is not known, but
it was probably in the very last days of 408.

[Sidenote: _409. Alaric negotiates._]

[Sidenote: _Moderation of his requests._]

The next year, 409, is the _year of the anti-Emperor, Attalus_. All
Alaric’s dealings with the Senate and People of Rome at this time were
directed to the conclusion of a firm treaty of alliance, offensive and
defensive, with the Emperor. His aim was not to conquer Rome, or to
settle his followers in any part of Italy, but to legitimise his position
within the Empire, to have a large space on the Middle Danube, either
Noricum or Pannonia, assigned to his people, and then to be recognised
as Rome’s champion against all other enemies. In fact, he desired to
renew the old _federate_ relation only on a footing of equality instead
of one of semi-dependence. To all such propositions Honorius, or rather
the ministers who spoke in his name, replied with an unceasing ‘_non
possumus_,’ as they could not be attacked, being safe behind the dykes
and lagoons of Ravenna. Alaric’s only resource was to put pressure, even
cruel pressure, on Rome, in order to bring her sovereign to terms.

[Sidenote: _Oath sworn by the head of Honorius._]

A considerable part of the year 409 was consumed in these vain
negotiations. The Praetorian Prefect, Jovius, who had supplanted Olympius
in the position of chief adviser of the Emperor, seems to have been
at first disposed to try to make terms with Alaric, and to see if the
title ‘_Magister Utriusque Militiae_’ could not divert him from his
schemes of conquest. But Honorius demurred to the proposal, and Jovius,
accommodating himself to his master’s humour, insisted on all the chief
officers of the Emperor assembling round him and swearing by their
master’s head (which they touched in making the asseveration) that they
would make no peace with Alaric, but would wage against him perpetual
war. To all subsequent overtures of Alaric (and some of them surprise
us by their moderation, offering terms such as the Empire might have
safely and honourably granted), this tremendous oath by the empty head of
Honorius was opposed as an insuperable obstacle.

[Sidenote: _Attalus proclaimed Emperor._]

Alaric, whose patience was worn out, returned to Rome, and again formed
the blockade of the City. But the Senate, whose patience was equally
exhausted, refused to again undergo the horrors of famine and pestilence
for the ungrateful Honorius, and sent messengers to Alaric declaring that
they were willing to renounce their allegiance to the Emperor. Peace on
these terms was easily arranged. Attalus, the Praetorian Prefect of the
City, a man of Greek extraction, was saluted as Emperor, and in that
capacity concluded a treaty with Alaric, recognising him as an ally
of the Empire, probably conceding to him a settlement in the coveted
provinces on the Danube, and conferring on him at once the splendid
position of _Magister Utriusque Militiae_.

[Sidenote: _410. Attalus refuses to divide Italy with Honorius._]

[Sidenote: _Supplies from Africa stopped._]

[Sidenote: _Attalus deposed._]

So opened the year 410, the ever-memorable year of the _Third Siege and
Capture of Rome_. It seemed for a time as if Attalus would indeed wrest
the Rule of All Things from his incapable rival. He marched towards
Ravenna, from whence issued forth a piteous supplication for peace on
the basis of a yet further subdivided Empire. If Honorius might but
continue to reign at Ravenna, Attalus should reign at Rome, and the
_Concordia Augustorum_ might unite them and Constantine, the Emperor
of the Gauls, with the son of Arcadius, Emperor of the East. Attalus
made a cruel and insulting reply, threatening his rival with mutilation
and banishment: but the timely arrival at Ravenna of six legions from
Constantinople prevented him from carrying his threat into execution, and
turned the tide of fortune. Famine again threatened Rome, from another
cause than the blockade of Alaric. Heraclian, to whom had been entrusted
the execution of the sentence against Stilicho, was now holding the
great province of Africa loyally for Honorius, and by cutting off the
food supplies of Carthage from Rome, brought the City into such terrible
straits that an angry cry was heard in the Amphitheatre, when the new
Emperor was sitting there in state watching the games, ‘Pone pretium
carni humanae’ (‘Fix the tariff for human flesh’). Alaric’s keen eye saw
that Africa was now the key of the position, and he urged upon Attalus
the necessity of sending troops, barbarian _foederati_, thither to
overcome Heraclian. But Attalus, who was evidently a futile, inefficient
ruler, delayed and lingered, and, as it was hinted, began to entertain
schemes for disembarrassing himself of the oppressive patronage of the
Visigoth. At length Alaric, tired of his vacillation and bad faith,
and recognising the failure of his scheme of creating a rival Emperor,
assembled his army on the plain outside Ariminum, and there, in the
sight of thousands of Romans and Goths, formally stripped Attalus of the
emblems of Empire, and proclaimed that he was reduced to the rank of a
private citizen.

[Sidenote: _Sarus breaks off the negotiations between Alaric and
Honorius._]

The diadem and the purple were sent to Honorius at Ravenna, and it seemed
for a moment as if the just and honourable peace, so eagerly desired by
Italy, by Rome, and by Alaric, might be secured. But Sarus the Goth, the
same man who had turned treacherously against Stilicho in his adversity,
and who, perhaps on that account, hated Alaric and was hated by him,
entered Ravenna at the head of 300 veterans, and succeeded in breaking
off the just-resumed thread of the negotiations.

Then at length, as it seemed that nothing but the sword could cut the
Gordian knot, Alaric again crossed the Apennines, determined to show what
he could do to Rome as an enemy, since she in her infatuation rejected
him as a friend.

[Sidenote: _Alaric enters Rome, 24 Aug. 410._]

There was this time no long agony of blockade, no famine or pestilence.
On the night of the 24th of August, 410, almost as soon as he had
appeared under the walls of the City, Alaric effected an entrance through
the Salarian Gate, at the north-east corner of the City, at very nearly
the same place where, on the 20th Sept. 1870, the soldiers of Victor
Emmanuel entered Rome. Whether the gate was carried by a sudden surprise,
or was opened by slaves or treacherous citizens within, it is impossible
now to decide; but the theory of surprise seems, upon the whole, most
probable. The splendid palace of the historian Sallust, hard by the
Salarian Gate, was set on fire, and its spacious gardens had their beauty
ruined by the entering Gothic soldiers.

[Sidenote: _Rome sacked._]

Thus, then, at length ‘the great city which reigned over the kings of the
whole earth’ was captured and was pillaged by a foreign and a barbarian
enemy. Civil war, sedition, frenzied Emperors had ‘dealt upon the
Seven-hilled City’s pride’ in the course of the centuries; but not for
800 years—not since Brennus and his Gauls had slain the Conscript Fathers
in the Forum—had Rome been violently entered by a conquering foreign foe.
There were some alleviations to the horrors of the capture, derived from
the fact that the assailants were Christians; and these alleviations
are naturally emphasised by the Church historians, from whom we derive
most of our scanty information as to the Third Siege of Rome. Alaric had
ordered that no Christian church should be injured, and that the right of
asylum, especially in the two great Basilicas of St. Peter and St. Paul,
should be religiously observed. These orders were perhaps made known to
the citizens, multitudes of whom, Pagan as well as Christian, were soon
flying for shelter to these islands of safety. But notwithstanding any
such humane orders, honourable both to the general who issued them and
to the army by whom they were obeyed, the sack of a great and wealthy
city by a hungry and exasperated army of barbarians was of necessity a
terrible thing. We hear of an aged widow beaten to death to make her
disclose her imaginary treasures, of matrons ravished, of palaces laid
in ashes. And above all rose now the terrible fact that _Roma Invicta_
had been conquered. Where one barbarian chief had penetrated, more could,
and of a surety would, follow. The citizens henceforth—like men who have
lived through a great and fearful earthquake—must live evermore in dread
of seeing the ghastly terror recommence.

As even political caricatures may sometimes help us to understand what
contemporary spectators think of the actors on the stage of history, let
us listen to Procopius, who wrote 150 years later, but who has preserved
to us a possibly contemporary story, as to the reception of the news of
the fall of Rome by the Roman Augustus.

[Sidenote: _Reception of the tidings by Honorius._]

‘They say that at Ravenna one of the eunuchs who was in charge of the
Imperial poultry announced to the Emperor Honorius that Roma had actually
perished. Whereupon he cried with a loud voice—“But just now he fed out
of my hands!” [for he had an exceedingly large fowl, Roma, by name.] Then
the eunuch, understanding what was passing in his mind, said that it
was Roma the _City_ which had been destroyed by Alaric. But the Emperor
in reply said, “But I thought, my friend, that the _bird_ Roma had
perished!”—so great they say was the stupidity of this Emperor.’

[Sidenote: _The capture of Rome settled nothing._]

[Sidenote: _Death of Alaric, 410._]

The capture of Rome by Alaric, though an event of incalculable importance
in the history of the world, settled nothing in the immediate present.
Still the Augustus, the only legitimate source of power in the Roman
State, remained inaccessible at Ravenna. Still Heraclian, his yet loyal
governor of Africa, held that province for his master, withholding the
grain-supplies without which Rome could not live. Still Alaric could not
conquer that firm peace, guaranteed by sufficient hostages, and securing
to him a lawful position in the Empire, without which he was determined
not to return to Illyricum. He marched to the extreme south of Italy,
and designed to cross over into Sicily, in whose ports he would probably
have collected an armament for the conquest of Africa. But he never
effected the passage of the Straits of Messina, the ships which he had
collected at Rhegium being destroyed by a violent storm. While he was
still lingering in Calabria he was seized by an illness, which lasted
but a few days. He had ‘penetrated to the City’; his work was done. The
fateful voice rang in his ears no longer, telling him of great exploits
yet reserved for him in the future, but instead of it came Death. He
was probably in about the forty-fifth year of his age; so that he, like
Theodosius, left great possibilities of conquest unexhausted. But in his
short career he had done enough to change the current of the world’s
history.

[Sidenote: _Burial of Alaric._]

The story of his burial is well known. In order to guard his grave from
the possibility of insult at the hands of the Provincials, a number of
captives were employed in diverting the stream of the Busentus, a river
of Bruttii. In the old river-bed a great trench was dug, wherein were
laid the bones of the conquering king, and, after the fashion of his
heathen forefathers, some of the most precious spoils of Rome were laid
by his side, that he might not miss them in the gardens of Paradise or
the halls of Walhalla. Then the trench was filled in, the river was
turned back into its ancient bed, the captives were slain: and thus ‘no
man knoweth his sepulchre unto this day.’




LECTURE VI.

PLACIDIA: ATTILA.


[Sidenote: _Historical perspective._]

An interval of forty-two years elapsed between Alaric’s sack of Rome
and the next great barbarian invasion of Italy. To us, looking at these
years as they appear on the outstretched map of History, it is manifest
that they were years of gradual but progressive decline and decay for the
Roman Empire. Probably, but not certainly, they wore the same aspect to
contemporary observers. But the important point to remember is that there
_was_ such an interval between the first and the second acts of the great
World-Tragedy. Reading history in a manual, or glancing over it in such
a rapid sketch as I am now attempting to draw, we are apt to forget how
slowly some of its scenes have unrolled themselves. Superficial students,
if they do not actually confound Alaric with Attila, often think of them
as contemporaries, perhaps as allies, and suppose that they and Genseric
and Odoacer, by some combined and concerted effort, brought about ‘the
fall of the Western Empire.’ What I want to impress upon my hearers is
the fact that if a child was born on the day that Alaric was laid under
the waters of the Busentus, he would be a middle-aged man when Attila
stood under the walls of Aquileia, and would be verging on threescore
and ten when the last Roman Emperor of the West was bidden to hand over
the purple and the diadem to a barbarian conqueror. I ask also for a full
measure of pity for those true Roman hearts whose allotted span of life
had to be all passed in these years of irresistible decline. There are
times like that of which a poet has sung—

    ‘Bliss was it in those days to be alive,
    And to be young was very heaven;’

times like the first years that followed the battle of Salamis, like the
first thrill and rapture of the Crusades, like ‘the spacious days of
great Elizabeth,’ when the life of a nation has been so strong, so fresh,
and so triumphant that one feels as if even the saddest individual life
must have been overflowed by the great national gladness and saved from
utter sorrow. On the other hand, could even the most unclouded domestic
happiness atone to a patriotic Roman who lived in the fifth century for
the necessity of watching the lingering agony of his country? Like a man
dwelling upon a subsiding continent, he saw one familiar landmark after
another submerged beneath the waters of barbarism. Or like those remote
descendants of ours, if such shall then be living on this planet, who, as
physical philosophers tell us, will see this earth begin to part with her
atmosphere and become incapable of sustaining organic life, he must have
felt that all the old conditions of being were inverted, and that life by
the beautiful Mediterranean was going to become in truth unliveable.

[Sidenote: _Early life of Placidia, born about 388._]

[Sidenote: _Death of Galla, 394. Death of Theodosius, 395._]

[Sidenote: _Captivity of Placidia._]

In order to bring the length of this interval of comparative tranquillity
properly before our minds, let us trace the fortunes of one person who
lived through it, a daughter, sister, wife and mother of Emperors, the
lady Galla Placidia. The daughter of Theodosius’s second marriage, she
lost her mother, Galla, when a child of five or six years old, and
her father in the following year. She appears to have been brought up
at Rome, perhaps by her kinswoman Serena, who possibly intended that
she should be the bride of her son, Eucherius. Her position was one
of forlorn splendour, that of an orphan with no sister and with two
such brothers as Arcadius and Honorius; nor does it appear to have
been cheered by any gleams of friendship between herself and the house
of Stilicho. When Alaric first appeared under the walls of Rome, the
resolution to put Serena to death as his suspected accomplice was taken
‘by the Senate and by the Emperor’s sister, Placidia[75].’ Probably the
name of a young maiden of twenty was somewhat ostentatiously used by the
Senate in order to justify their own action against the niece of the
great Theodosius: still it is impossible for the admirers of Placidia
(of whom I am one) not to regret that her influence on this occasion was
exerted on the side of vengeance rather than on the side of compassion.
It was probably at the end of the first siege of Rome that Placidia was
taken prisoner by the Goths, who retained her as a hostage, but treated
her with all outward show of honour and royal ministrations. She was
therefore doubtless present at the great assembly at Ariminum, where her
brother’s rival, Attalus, was deposed; she would hear from the Gothic
soldiers their histories of the sack of Rome; she perhaps saw the mighty
form of her conqueror outstretched in death in his tent by the Busentus.
Now, for the next five years, her history was to be singularly interwoven
with that of his brother-in-law and successor, Ataulfus.

[Sidenote: _Alaric’s successor, Ataulfus._]

This man, whose name is in fact the same as one of those borne by another
great Northern conqueror, Gustavus _Adolphus_, had joined Alaric with
reinforcements raised in Upper Pannonia in the year 409, and had taken
part in the skirmishes with Sarus before Ravenna, which preceded the
Third Siege of Rome. He was a blood-relation[76] of Alaric, as well
as his kinsman by marriage, and was by general acclamation hailed as
his successor and raised on the shield as king. Though not boasting
the full number of inches of a Gothic warrior, he was of shapely form
and noble countenance. He is especially interesting to us, because a
chance conversation with a Provincial, a conversation which passed at
Narbonne and was reported at Bethlehem, gives us a glimpse into his own
secret hopes and aspirations, such as we do not possess into the mind
of any other leader of the barbarians. Orosius tells us that when he
was at Bethlehem he heard a citizen of Narbonne, who had served under
Theodosius, and who was a wise and religious person, say that Ataulfus
had frequently told him ‘that his first thought when he entered on the
career of conquest had been to claim for the Goths all that leadership
of the world which had once belonged to the Romans, and to vindicate for
himself a position like that which had belonged to the mighty Augustus.
Gradually, however, the fashion of his dreams had changed. He saw that
it was not by the sword alone, but by law, that Rome had dominated the
world, and that his own countrymen, wild and impetuous, had not learned
that lesson of obedience to Law which alone could fit them to rule; and
now his whole desire was to restore and re-invigorate the great Roman
Commonwealth, transforming that which he once hoped to destroy.’

Consciously or unconsciously every really statesmanlike intellect among
the Northern chieftains must have gone through the same change and come
to the same conclusion. Out of the Goth, or the Frank, or the Saxon
alone it was not possible yet to form a law-abiding nation. Either
from the Roman State or the Roman Church they must learn those habits
of discipline and self-restraint which they did in the end learn, and
practise as no purely Romance nation, far less any purely Celtic nation,
has ever practised them. What Ataulfus saw to be the statesman’s true aim
was that which Theodoric accomplished with temporary, and Charlemagne
with somewhat more permanent success—that transfusion of fresh Teutonic
blood into the old Roman body which has in fact made modern Europe.

[Sidenote: _Loves of Ataulfus and Placidia._]

[Sidenote: _Their marriage at Narbonne, 414._]

The political conversion of Ataulfus was aided, as conversions have been
so often aided, by a woman. The fair Placidia, forced to follow all the
movements of the Gothic army, yet ‘treated with all honour and ever
tended with royal ministrations,’ vanquished his heart. The old saying
that ‘conquered Greece led her victor captive’ was renewed with Placidia
and Ataulfus; but with a delicacy which we should term chivalrous if we
were speaking of a later age, he refused to make her his bride, though
she too loved him, till the consent of her brother came from Ravenna.
After four years of weary negotiations this consent was obtained, but not
until the Goths had marched out of Italy into Gaul. In January, 414, the
marriage of the Gothic king and the Roman Lady was celebrated at Narbonne
at the house of a citizen named Ingenuus. The ‘wise and religious person’
who afterwards conversed with Jerome at Bethlehem was doubtless present
at the wedding, if indeed he were not (as is very probable) Ingenuus
himself. Men noticed with interest that Ataulfus entered the inner
apartment to claim his bride, dressed, not in the barbaric splendour of
his countrymen, but like a Roman Senator. They saw with admiration the
fifty goodly youths in silken robes, bearing plates filled with gold
and gems, who formed part of Ataulfus’ splendid _Morgen-gabe_[77] to
his bride. Then came music, and they saw, perhaps not without a touch
of scorn, Attalus, once Emperor of Rome, leading the dance and song in
honour of his great patron’s wedding.

[Sidenote: _Fortunes of the Visigothic kingdom._]

[Sidenote: _Death of Placidia’s child, and of Ataulfus, 415._]

Unhappily for the world, this union of Roman and barbarian led to no
abiding results. The kingdom set up by Ataulfus did indeed endure, though
not exactly in the shape which he had given to it. Established at first
chiefly as a South Gaulish kingdom, and remaining such till the conquests
of Clovis at the end of the fifth century, it then shifted its centre
of gravity southward of the Pyrenees and became that Visigothic kingdom
of Spain which was overthrown by the Moors in 711, and which gradually
crept back to life again under the kings of Leon, Castille, and Arragon.
But the dynasty of Ataulfus himself was short-lived. A child, named
Theodosius, was born to him by Placidia; but this child, around which so
many hopes centered, died, to the unspeakable grief of its parents, and
was buried in a silver coffin at Barcelona, where they then dwelt. Soon
after the infant’s death the father was stabbed in the back by one of his
servants, who thus avenged an old grudge for the execution of a former
master. His dying words to his brother were, ‘Live in peace with Rome and
restore Placidia to Honorius.’

[Sidenote: _416-423._]

[Sidenote: _Humiliations of Placidia._]

[Sidenote: _She is restored to Honorius, 416._]

The murder of Ataulfus was possibly connected with a sort of insurrection
against the Roman influences which had been of late so powerful in the
Gothic Court. His successor, the brutal Singeric, murdered the sons of
Ataulfus (the children of his first marriage) and forced Placidia to
walk as a captive before his chariot for twelve miles from the gates
of Barcelona. After only eight days’ reign however, this ruffian was
dethroned and slain, and the gallant Walia was acclaimed king, whose name
is one of the most distinguished in the early history of the Visigothic
monarchy. He renewed and strengthened the alliance with Rome, and gave
back Placidia to the Emperor, receiving in return the somewhat prosaic
ransom of 19,000 quarters of corn.

[Sidenote: _Her marriage to Constantius._]

Placidia was escorted by the Roman general who had received her from the
hands of the Goths to her brother’s Court at Ravenna, and there, nearly
two years after the death of Ataulfus, she gave her hand to this general,
an old lover of hers named Constantius.

[Sidenote: _Second widowhood and exile of Placidia._]

The union of Constantius and Placidia lasted four years, and the fruit
of it was a son and a daughter, the first named Valentinian (after his
maternal great-grandfather), the second, Honoria. Constantius, a brave
soldier, but a rough, sullen, unpopular man, was associated in the Empire
by his brother-in-law, and, after six months’ enjoyment of the Imperial
dignity, died, apparently of mere _ennui_, in 421. Two years after his
death, Placidia and her children withdrew to Constantinople, on account
of a quarrel which had broken out with her brother, who, as I suspect
from the description of his conduct, had begun to show symptoms of
softening of the brain.

[Sidenote: _Death of Honorius. Elevation of Joannes._]

[Sidenote: _423-425._]

In this same year (423) Honorius died at the age of thirty-nine, and
was buried in a gigantic marble sarcophagus, which may still be seen in
‘the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia’ at Ravenna. There was no member of
the family of Theodosius on the spot to claim the vacant diadem, and
Joannes, a somewhat obscure member of the Civil Service (_Primicerius
Notariorum_), was permitted to wear it, under the patronage of the
powerful _Magister Militum_, Castinus.

[Sidenote: _Theodosius II places the son of Placidia on the Western
throne._]

When the news of this event (usurpation we must not call it, for there
was no strict hereditary right in the Roman Empire) reached the Court of
Constantinople, the young Emperor Theodosius II, the son of Arcadius,
determined to send an expedition to the West to overthrow Joannes.
The expedition was commanded by two brave Alans—father and son—named
Ardaburius and Aspar; and, after one or two reverses, was in the end
completely successful. Joannes was brought as a prisoner to Aquileia;
his right hand was cut off, he was paraded round the city upon an ass,
and, after some more ungenerous insults of this kind, he was put to
death. Ravenna, which had sympathised with the elevation of Joannes,
was punished by being sacked by the soldiers of Ardaburius. Rome was
flattered by the young Valentinian III, a boy of seven years old, being
sent there to assume the purple. At Constantinople, Theodosius II and his
people, who were assembled in the Hippodrome when the news of victory
arrived, walked in procession to the great Basilica, singing praises to
God for his deliverance.

[Sidenote: _Placidia as regent, 425-450._]

From 425 to 450, that is, from the thirty-eighth to the sixty-third year
of her life, Placidia was virtually the sovereign of what remained of the
Western Empire. She was already styled Augusta in right of her husband
Constantius’ six months’ wearing of the purple. She was, in accordance
with one or two precedents, entitled to hold the reins of power (with the
rank, though not the precise title, of Regent) during her son’s minority:
and as that son was idle and pleasure-loving, reproducing only the weaker
features of the Theodosian character, she continued to hold them after he
had grown to manhood, and until her own death in 450.

[Sidenote: _Events of Placidia’s regency._]

Great events, disastrous events, were happening during this second
quarter of the fifth century. In the Church of the East the wind was
rising for that great storm of the Monophysite controversy which for
a hundred years took peace from the earth. In the West, Carthage was
being conquered by the Vandals, Gaul and Spain were being more and
more hopelessly lost to the Empire, ‘the groans of the Britons’ were
being borne across the sea to ‘Aetius, thrice Consul.’ All these events
Placidia had to witness with failing heart from her palace at Ravenna by
the Pine Wood and the sea.

[Sidenote: _Her chief adviser, Aetius._]

[Sidenote: _Danger from the Huns._]

If the Augusta did not herself display any conspicuous faculty of rule
during these twenty-five years of decline, she at least had the merit
of loyally supporting the one man who, like Stilicho in the previous
generation, was best able to sustain the falling Empire. This was that
‘Aetius thrice Consul’ to whom allusion has just been made. He was born
at Silistria, on the Danube, the son of Gaudentius, an official of high
rank in the Western Empire. If he was not of barbarian extraction, a
point on which we cannot speak with certainty, the events of his life
threw him into close intercourse with the barbarians. For three years a
hostage in the camp of the Visigoths, and then, for an indefinite time,
hostage in the country of the Huns, he had contracted friendships with
the leading men of both nations, had perhaps learned something of their
language, had doubtless observed their tactics and formed his own opinion
of the best means of defeating them[78]. After the death of Honorius
he had adhered to the party of Joannes, but, not having been able to
avert his overthrow, he had accepted high command under Placidia and
Valentinian, whom he served loyally to the end of his days[79]. Loyally,
that is, as far as his sovereigns were concerned. If the hitherto
accepted story of his quarrel with Bonifacius, governor of Africa, be
correct, there was deep disloyalty on the part of Aetius towards his
greatest colleague in the Imperial service, and that disloyalty cost a
province to the Empire; but the account of these transactions may be
reserved till the next lecture, in which I shall have to speak of the
conquests of the Vandals. During ten years, from 429 to 439, the energies
of Aetius were chiefly directed to maintaining some hold on the East and
Centre of Gaul, with which object he waged war with diverse success on
the Visigoths, the Franks, and the Burgundians, and it is noteworthy
that in these wars the most useful auxiliaries of Aetius were men of
the Hunnish nation. During the last nine years of the life of Placidia
(441-450) the chief factor in European politics, the care that bit most
deeply into the hearts both of the Eastern and Western Sovereigns of the
Empire, was the menacing might of ATTILA, king of the HUNS. To these
savage Asiatic marauders it is now time to turn our attention.

[Sidenote: _History of the Huns after 374._]

For more than fifty years after the Huns crossed the Sea of Azof, and
fell like a thunderbolt on the kingdom of Hermanric the Ostrogoth, their
history is almost a blank. They had set in motion an avalanche of ruin
on the Empire, but they themselves, though doubtless spreading wide the
terror of their name through Southern Russia and Hungary, and though once
travelling southward as far as Antioch on a marauding expedition, did
not often during this period come forward as claimants for the goods of
the dying Empire. In fact, as we have already seen, on several occasions
the Hunnish soldier seems to have been the bravest and most faithful of
the auxiliaries of Rome. In part this was probably due to common enmity
to the intervening Visigoths. The Roman Provincial hated and feared the
Goth: the Goth feared and loathed the Hun: accordingly the Roman and the
Hun found it for their interest to be friends.

[Sidenote: _Attila’s accession, 433._]

[Sidenote: _His character and appearance._]

[Sidenote: _The sword of Mars._]

In the year 433, Attila and his brother Bleda mounted the throne of
the Huns. Twelve years later Bleda died, having been, according to
some accounts, craftily slain by order of his brother. At all times
Attila’s was the commanding personality, and with him alone need we here
concern ourselves. Let us hear how he is described by the historian of
the Goths[80]: ‘Attila was a man born into the world to agitate the
nations, the fear of all lands, one who, I hardly know how, terrified
all by the awful apprehensions spread abroad concerning him. He was
proud in his gait, rolling his eyes hither and thither, so that the
elation of his heart showed itself even by every movement of his body: a
lover of war, but not himself given to acts of violence[81], mighty in
counsel, placable by those who humbled themselves before him, favourable
to those whom he had admitted to his fealty: short of stature, broad
of chest, with an over-large head, with little eyes, thin beard, hair
sprinkled with grey, turned-up nose, muddy complexion. All these were
the characteristics which recalled his origin’ [or, to use our modern
phraseology, the distinctive marks of the Mongol race]. ‘By natural
temperament he was always confident that he should do great things, but
this confidence of his was increased by finding “the sword of Mars,”
which is ever held sacred by the Scythian kings, and which is said to
have been discovered in this way. A certain herdsman saw one of his
heifers limping, and being anxious to discover the cause of her wound,
carefully followed her bleeding footprints through the grass, till at
length he came to the sword, upon which the heifer had incautiously
trodden while grazing, and having dug it up he at once carried it to
Attila. He, having gratified the herdsman with a generous present, deemed
himself to be now appointed sovereign of the whole world, and victory in
all wars to be assured to him in right of the sword of Mars.’

[Sidenote: _433. Hunnish demands at Constantinople._]

Immediately upon the accession of Attila and Bleda, they demanded and
obtained from the Eastern Emperor the duplication of their yearly
_stipendium_, or, as they more truly called it, tribute, which was now
raised from £14,000 to £28,000. At the same time they insisted on the
return of all Huns or Romans who had fled from the Hunnish dominions and
taken refuge under the ineffectual aegis of Rome. This demand for the
surrender of refugees, the result, doubtless, of the barbarous despotism
of the Huns, was afterwards frequently renewed, and its imperfect
fulfilment was a standing grievance against the Eastern Emperor.

[Sidenote: _433-441. Extent of Attila’s Empire._]

For the next eight years, however, we hear but little of diplomatic
relations between Attila and the Empire. There can be little doubt
that during these years he was engaged in consolidating his dominions
northwards and eastwards. His own peculiar territory was evidently
the flat land of what we now call Hungary, between the Danube and the
Carpathians; but the nations which owned his over-lordship stretched
probably from the Caspian to the Rhine. Very loose and ill-compacted,
no doubt, was the Empire of the Huns; but the kings of the Ostrogoths,
Gepidae, Alans, Suevi, and Heruli, all followed Attila to battle, all
formed part of that confederacy of rapine which he could hurl whenever it
pleased him against a civilised and wealthy foe.

[Sidenote: _His campaigns in Asia._]

[Sidenote: _Did he drive our Saxon forefathers from their homes?_]

In the East another Tartar horde, the Geougen, perhaps even more savage
than the Huns themselves, threatened the new barbarian Empire; but Attila
appears to have formed an alliance with China which neutralised their
hostility, and left him free to prosecute his designs of conquest west of
the Ural mountains and south of the Caspian. He marched from the latter
sea fifteen days southward into the Persian kingdom, and ravaged the
ancient province of Media. He evidently ruled without a rival in European
Russia, or at least in that part of it which was then worthy of even a
barbarian’s notice, and—what is more important to us—he had, we are told,
‘subjected the islands in the ocean to his sway.’ These ‘islands in the
ocean’ can be none other than the islands and peninsula of Denmark and
the southern part of Sweden, which the geographers of the time considered
to be an island. Now, however transient may have been the Hunnish
conquest of those Baltic lands, of Holstein, Jutland, and South Sweden,
it was sufficient to produce results of world-historical importance.
In those lands our fathers, the Saxons, the Jutes, the Angles, were
dwelling at the commencement of the fifth century, making doubtless
many a piratical raid against the ‘_Litus Saxonicum_’ in Britain, but,
as a rule, returning with their plunder to their homes by the Baltic.
From those lands, before the year 441, they had begun to swarm forth,
alighting upon the eastern and southern coasts of Britain, coming
probably with wives and children, and coming to conquer and to _remain_.
Why this new and sudden change in the current of the nation’s thoughts?
Surely it was the swarthy Hunnish riders, the same who had scared the
Visigoths across the Danube, who sent the Angle and the Saxon in their
long ships scudding across the German Ocean. If this be so, the obscure
movements of this squalid Hunnish people not only threw down the Empire
of Rome, but indirectly caused the building up of the Empire of England.

[Sidenote: _Attila torments the Eastern and Western Courts with his
embassies, 441-450._]

With the year 441, Attila re-enters the arena of Imperial politics. For
the next nine years he sends ceaseless embassies to the Eastern and
Western Empires, ostensibly to press for the redress of grievances,
really in order to claim higher and ever higher terms for the maintenance
of peace, and to enrich his favourites at Court by the presents which he
well knows that the trembling Augusti at Constantinople and Ravenna will
give them in order to purchase their good offices with their master.

The standing grievance against the Eastern Court was, as has been said,
the alleged failure to surrender the fugitives, Hunnish princes or Roman
merchants, who had escaped from Attila’s dominions. The chief grievances
against Placidia and Valentinian were two: the vases of Sirmium and the
dowry of the lady Honoria.

[Sidenote: _The matter of the Sirmian vases._]

(1) A certain Gaulish provincial named Constantius, who filled the post
of Secretary to Attila, when the city of Sirmium was besieged by the
Huns, received from the Bishop of that city a deposit of the rich gold
Communion-plate of the Church, in trust to apply the proceeds to the
ransoming of the Bishop and his flock. Regardless, however, of this
trust, he carried off the sacred vessels to Rome and raised a large sum
of money upon them from the goldsmith, Silvanus. Eventually Sirmium
was taken; Constantius, a traitor to all parties, was crucified; and
Attila, claiming a sort of ‘resulting trust’ of the vases for himself as
conqueror, insisted that Silvanus should be surrendered to him as having
stolen _his_ property.

[Sidenote: _Honoria’s ring._]

(2) Honoria, the sister of Valentinian III, a young and giddy girl, had
compromised her reputation by an intrigue with an Imperial chamberlain,
and was sent by her mother to the Court of Constantinople in a kind of
honourable imprisonment. Her spirit chafed at the seclusion in which
she was kept by her four middle-aged and almost nun-like cousins, and
she formed the wild scheme of plighting her troth to the King of the
Huns, and calling upon him to be her deliverer. Attila received the ring
which she sent him, and, though he had already many wives, disdained not
to add Honoria to the number, so far at least as this that ‘he claimed
as her betrothed husband one half of the Western Empire which had been
bequeathed to Honoria by her father, but out of which she was kept by her
brother’s covetousness.’

[Sidenote: _Embassy of 448._]

[Sidenote: _Imperial plot for Attila’s assassination._]

The most important of the return-embassies was that which was sent
by Theodosius II, in the year 448, to the Court of Attila. The chief
ambassador was Maximin, a man of illustrious birth and high official
rank; and the official whom we should call the Secretary of Legation
was Priscus, to whose able pen we owe a minute account of the embassy,
which is certainly the most interesting historical document of the
century. Both Maximin and Priscus were Pagans, and both were men of high
character. They were used, however, to cloak an infamous plot which
had been concerted at the Court of Constantinople, but of which they
were themselves ignorant, for the assassination of Attila by one of the
nobles of his guard named Edeco. It is like reading a chapter of _Quentin
Durward_ or _Les Trois Mousquetaires_, to see the way in which the plot
is hatched, developed, and finally detected: and the honest indignation
of Attila against ‘his slave, Theodosius, who paid him tribute but dared
to plot the assassination of his master,’ is finely expressed, and puts
the savage Hun for the time immeasurably above the cultured and nominally
Christian Emperor. I have no space here, however, to insert these
details; but, though it has been often quoted before, I must transcribe
Priscus’s account of Attila’s palace and of a banquet therein, to which
he and his chief were invited.

[Sidenote: _Attila’s palace._]

‘Having crossed some more rivers we arrived at length at a very large
village, in which was situated the palace of Attila. This dwelling was,
we were told, the finest building in all the country. It was made of
logs and smooth planks, and surrounded by wooden palisades, not for
safety but for ornament. Next to the King’s house, that of Onegesius
(his chief minister) was most conspicuous. It, too, was surrounded by a
palisading, but was not adorned with towers as Attila’s was. Not far from
this enclosure was a bath which Onegesius had built of stones brought
from Pannonian quarries, for the barbarians who dwell there have not a
stick nor a stone in their own country, but have to import all building
materials from a distance. The architect of this bath was carried captive
from Sirmium, and hoped to receive his freedom as the reward of his
ingenuity; but unconsciously he prepared for himself a worse lot than
that of ordinary slavery, for Onegesius made him his bath-man, and he had
to wait upon him and his retinue whenever they had a mind to bathe.’


THE BANQUET.

[Sidenote: _Attila’s banquet._]

‘When we returned to our tent, there came an invitation to us both from
Attila to be present at his banquet, which would take place about 3 P.M.
Punctually, at the time appointed, we went to the dinner and stood on
the threshold before Attila. According to the custom of the country,
the cup-bearer brought us a bowl of wine that we might pray for the
good-luck of the host before taking our seats. When this was done, and
we had just tasted the bowl, we came to the chairs of state on which
we were to sit at dinner-time. All the seats of the guests were ranged
along the walls on either side of the building. In the centre of all sat
Attila on a couch, with another couch behind him, behind which again a
flight of steps led up to his bed, hidden by curtains of white linen and
variegated stuffs, ornamentally arranged as the Greeks and Romans prepare
the nuptial couch.’ Then the order of precedence is described. The
Ambassadors, to their evident surprise, found that the seats of honour
were given, not to them, but to Hunnish nobles.

‘Opposite to Onegesius on a double chair sat two of the sons of Attila,
while his eldest son sat on Attila’s couch, not near to him but on its
extreme verge, and with eyes cast down upon the ground through awe of
his father. When all were thus arranged in order, the cup-bearer came in
and handed to Attila his ivy-wood drinking-cup filled with wine. When he
had received it, he saluted him who sat nearest him in rank. The guest
thus honoured stood up, and it was not etiquette for him to sit down
till he had sipped or drunk off the wine and returned the goblet to the
cup-bearer. In the same way all who were present showed their respect
to the King: he remaining seated all the while, they stood up, received
the cup, greeted him and tasted the wine. Behind each guest stood a
cup-bearer, whose business it was to go into the centre of the hall, each
in his proper order, and meet Attila’s cup-bearer coming out from beside
his master.

‘Then entered first Attila’s servant bearing a plate full of meat, and
after him came the general waiters who laid bread and other victuals on
the tables, of which there was one for every three or four guests, or
sometimes more. For all the rest of the barbarians and for us a costly
banquet had been prepared, which was served on silver dishes, but Attila
had plain meat on his wooden plate. He showed also simple tastes in all
his other surroundings. For the other banqueters had golden and silver
drinking-cups put beside them, but his was of wood. His raiment also was
quite plain, distinguished by its cleanness only from that of any of
his followers; and neither the sword which was hung up beside him, nor
the clasps of his barbaresque shoes, nor the bridle of his horse, was
adorned, as is the case with other Huns, with gold or precious stones or
anything else that is costly.’

Priscus then again describes the drinking of Attila’s health, which was
performed by all the guests, standing, between each of the courses.

‘When evening came on, torches were lighted, and two barbarians coming in
and standing opposite to Attila, recited songs previously composed, in
which they sang of his victories and his warlike virtues. The banqueters
gazed earnestly on the minstrels; some were delighted with the poems;
others, remembering past conflicts, felt their souls stirred within them;
while the old were melted into tears by the thought that their bodies
were grown weak through age and their hot hearts were compelled into
repose.

‘When the songs were ended a mad Hun came forward, who by his strange,
wild, incessant chatter moved all the guests to laughter. After him
entered Zercon the Moor’ [whom we know from another source[82] to have
been a hump-backed dwarf with ape-like nose]. ‘By his garb, his voice,
and his wild promiscuous jumble of Latin, Hunnish, and Gothic words,
he sent all present, except Attila, into fits of laughter. The King,
however, remained quite unmoved, changed not a line of his countenance,
and neither by word nor deed showed the slightest enjoyment of the joke,
except that when his youngest son, Ernak, came in and stood beside him
he gently pinched his cheek and looked upon him with kindly gaze. When I
expressed my wonder at his neglect of his other sons and the favour which
he showed to this one, the barbarian who sat beside me and who understood
the Italian language, after making me promise secrecy, assured me that
the prophets had foretold to Attila that his race should suffer reverses
and then be raised up again by this son.

‘When we had sat at the banquet till far into the night, we departed, not
wishing to persist in drinking any longer.’

From this single picture we may imagine the scenes which frequently
occurred when the Ambassadors of Theodosius and Valentinian came, with
fearful hearts, into the presence of Attila, striving, yet striving in
vain, to keep up the traditions of the majesty of Rome. We may imagine,
too, the reception which would be accorded to the Teutonic under-kings,
Gepid, Herul, Ostrogoth, when they came, as assuredly they would come, at
least once a year, into the presence of their supreme lord.

[Sidenote: _Deaths of Placidia and Theodosius II, 450._]

[Sidenote: _Marcian, the new Eastern Emperor, will not truckle to
Attila._]

The years from 441 to 450, the era of embassies, came to an end. In
450 death wrought great changes in the palaces both of Ravenna and
Constantinople. In the West, Placidia died, and the functions as well as
the show of governing had to be assumed by Valentinian III, who still for
a time gave his confidence loyally to Aetius. In the East, Theodosius
II died of injuries received by a fall from a runaway horse, and the
sovereign power became vested in his sister Pulcheria and her husband,
the brave old soldier, Marcian. The next Ambassador sent by Marcian’s
orders to the Court of Attila took a higher and more manly tone than
the Hun had heard during the whole reign of Theodosius. It was clear
that there would be no more chance of sending oppressive embassies, of
doubling and quadrupling the ‘tribute,’ or of worrying about the return
of refugees. Any further advantages that were to be gained from the East
must be gained at the point of the sword: and upon a survey of the whole
situation, Attila decided that since the time had come for war it should
be war, not with the East but with the West, not with the grim Marcian
but with the soft and indolent Valentinian.

There is thus a certain correspondence between the careers of Alaric and
Attila. Each took up a position on the confines of the two Empires. Each
at first spent some years in making war or threatening war on the Eastern
Empire, and each finally devoted his whole energies to war with the
Empire of the West.

[Sidenote: _Attila prepares for war with the Western Empire._]

Pretexts for war were of course easily found. The great question of
the vases of Sirmium was probably still unsettled. Honoria’s dowry had
certainly not been handed over to the affianced Hun. Aetius, warring in
Gaul, had seated on one of the Frankish thrones a young prince (possibly
Meroveus), whose supplanted rival claimed the assistance of Attila.
Above all, the Huns and their allies yearned to burn, to plunder, to
slay, and the Western provinces alone could at the moment satiate this
desire. Attila did not, however, entirely neglect the prudent precautions
of a statesman. He concluded an alliance, offensive and defensive, with
Gaiseric, the Vandal conqueror of Carthage, an alliance which, had it
been followed up by a well-timed Vandal attack on Rome, might probably
have ended the life of the Western Empire.

[Sidenote: _Alliance between that Empire and the Visigoths. 451._]

On the other hand, Aetius, at this crisis of the fortunes of Gaul,
concluded an alliance which was of infinite importance, both for its
immediate results and for the rearrangement of parties to which it
pointed in the not distant future. Theodoric the Visigoth, successor of
Walia, reigned at Toulouse over a well-compacted monarchy which had been
rapidly growing in strength and in civilisation. We are now speaking of
a time forty-one years after Alaric’s sack of Rome: and the days when
the Visigoths were a wandering horde of _foederati_, seeking on almost
any terms for a recognised position within the Empire, are already far
below the horizon. Theodoric is the acknowledged lord of one of the
fairest portions of Gaul; his people have become a dominant caste of
warriors, whose ascendancy the Provincials do not dream of disputing; but
Aetius has been for years struggling, sometimes with the aid of Hunnish
auxiliaries, to prevent him from extending his dominion yet further over
Gaul.

Now, in the presence of this vaster danger, this thunder-cloud rolling up
from the plains of Hungary, which threatens to overwhelm Goth and Roman
in one common ruin, all these bickerings cease. The Visigoth no doubt is
yet barbarous, but he is rapidly becoming civilised; while the Hun is an
utter savage. The Visigoth, though an Arian, is a Christian; the Hun is
a brutal Pagan. The Visigoth desires, it is true, to rule in Gaul; but
the Hun will utterly destroy it. The result of these considerations was
that Aetius and Theodoric formed an alliance against the invader, and,
notwithstanding some delays and some misunderstandings, they seem on the
whole to have both, honourably observed its obligations.

[Sidenote: _Attila enters Gaul, 451._]

[Sidenote: _Siege of Orleans._]

[Sidenote: _Attila retreats._]

At Eastertide, 451, the waters of the great deep were broken up. The
motley host, said to number half a million of men, marshalled by ‘a mob
of kings[83],’ but all trembling at the nod of Attila, moved westward,
hewed down trees in the Thuringer Wald, and, on the rude boats and
rafts which they thus constructed, crossed the Rhine. All the towns in
Belgic Gaul—Tongres, Metz, Rheims—yielded to their savage onslaught.
Everywhere flew the red banner of fire. The citizens were slain on their
hearth-stones; the priests, against whom the invaders had an especial
hatred, were murdered before the altars, on which glittered the coveted
silver and gold. Paris escaped destruction; whether saved by the prayers
of Sainte Geneviève or guarded by its own comparative insignificance it
is not for us to decide. So the savage host, having rolled on through
Belgic and Lugdunensian Gaul, reached the great river Loire, which
circled the kingdom of the Visigoths. Here they laid siege to Orleans,
that city so memorable for her sieges. The battering-rams (for Attila
possessed these engines of war) were shaking the walls of the city, and
the inhabitants feared that only ruin was before them. But their Bishop,
Anianus, bade them be of good courage, and foretold that deliverance
would reach them on the 24th of June. On that day, while they were
praying in the church, Anianus sent a messenger to mount the ramparts
and see if help were approaching. The messenger went once, twice, in
vain. The third time he brought word that a cloud of dust was seen upon
the horizon. It was caused by the troops of Aetius and Theodoric, who,
after some delay and wavering of purpose, had joined forces and were
approaching to deliver the city. Attila, for some reason with which we
are not acquainted, declined to await their attack, and began to retrace
his steps towards the Rhine. Doubtless his vast army was difficult to
feed, and difficult to keep together, in the country which they had
so ruthlessly ravaged; and probably Attila foresaw great danger in
attempting to cross the broad Loire in the face of a large army, which
united Gothic courage to Roman science of war. Whatever the cause, he
retreated, and reached the city of Troyes, which he consented to exempt
from pillage on condition that the Bishop, St. Lupus, whose saintly
appearance awed and impressed him, should accompany him as far as the
Rhine. On the Mauriac plain, some five miles from Troyes, the pursuing
armies came up with him; and here was fought that ‘cruel, manifold,
monstrous, and stubborn battle[84]’ to which historians have given, not
quite correctly, the name of the Battle of Châlons.

[Sidenote: _Battle of Châlons. July? 451._]

Before the fight began, Attila consulted the rude auguries of his nation,
drawn from the inspection of the bowels of a sheep and the markings of
some bones. The soothsayers predicted ‘ill fortune to the Huns,’ but
qualified it with the assurance that the leader of their foes should
fall. The hope that Aetius, the one great Roman champion, would perish,
seemed to console Attila for the presage of his own defeat.

It was indeed a battle of many nations. Under the standards of the king
of the Huns marched Ostrogoths, Gepidae, Heruli, and a host of less-known
nationalities, Teutonic, Slavonic, and Turanian. The three kings of the
Ostrogoths, and especially the eldest of them, Walamir, and Ardaric,
king of the Gepidae, were Attila’s chief advisers and lieutenants on the
battle-field.

The allied army, on the other hand, contained not only Visigoths, who
were posted on the right wing, and Romans, who were on the left, but
Franks, Saxons, Bretons, Burgundians, and a number of other tribes
settled in Gaul. Chief among these lesser nationalities were the Alans,
who were settled at Valence on the Rhone. They were near of kin to the
Huns, and their king, Sangiban, was suspected of intending to desert to
them on the battle-field. He was therefore placed in the centre of the
allied line, tightly wedged in between Romans and Visigoths, both of whom
watched his movements narrowly and prevented him from accomplishing the
meditated treachery.

[Sidenote: _Hunnish defeat._]

Beyond this statement as to the Alans, and Attila’s orders to his troops
to neglect the Romans and strike hardest at the Visigoths, we hear little
or nothing as to the tactics of the day. The battle began at three in
the afternoon, and raged on, upon a line of immense length, till the
end of the July day. Theodoric, the Visigothic king, was thrown from
his horse and accidentally trampled to death by his own countrymen. His
men, however, rushed forward and broke the Hunnish line. Attila himself
fled and took shelter behind his rampart of waggons. Thorismund, son of
Theodoric, and Aetius both lost their way in the darkness which had now
come on, and nearly fell victims to their rashness, having actually
wandered into the quarters of the foe.

[Sidenote: _Results of the battle._]

The next morning dawned upon a ghastly sight. It is said that 177,000
men were slain in the ‘manifold and monstrous battle.’ This number
represents a slaughter nearly twice as great as that at Leipsic, with all
the improvements in the machinery of destruction which fifteen centuries
have wrought. It is doubtful whether we ought to listen with perfect
faith to calculations which were probably very hasty and fragmentary.
But it is not doubtful that the slaughter on the Mauriac plain was one
of the greatest ever witnessed on any battle-field before the invention
of gunpowder. And, measured by its results, the battle was even greater
than when we take account of the carnage. For this was pre-eminently one
of ‘the decisive battles of history,’ since it settled the question of
supremacy in Europe against the Hun, the squalid, unprogressive heathen
Tartar, and kept the ground clear for the Romance, the Teutonic, and the
Slavic peoples.

[Sidenote: _Attila retreats from Gaul. 451-2._]

The expectations of both armies that the battle would be renewed on the
morrow were not fulfilled. Attila, behind his entrenchments, bade his
trumpets sound, and feigned a fresh attack, but all the time he knew
himself beaten, and had a pyre of Hunnish saddles prepared, into which,
had his entrenchments been stormed, he would have cast himself headlong,
that living or dead he might escape the insults of his foes. Meanwhile
the Goths, having at length found their old king’s body, buried him on
the battle-field to the music of their rough war-songs. Thorismund then
marched rapidly to Toulouse to claim his father’s throne. Aetius also
quitted the field, and Attila was saved from utter destruction, whether
owing to the too great prudence of the allies or to a want of perfect
harmony between them, it is impossible now to determine. The Hunnish
king reached the Rhine without further molestation, and thence sent the
venerable Bishop Lupus back to Troyes, asking him to pray to the Almighty
for the welfare of his late entertainer.

[Sidenote: _Attila’s invasion of Italy, 452._]

[Sidenote: _Siege of Aquileia._]

[Sidenote: _Aquileia taken and destroyed._]

The next year (452) Attila determined to wipe out the shame of his defeat
by an invasion, not this time of Gaul, but of Italy. He crossed the
Julian Alps, entered Venetia by the well-known route, trodden of late by
so many armies, and invested the great, the hitherto impregnable city of
Aquileia. In two stubborn sieges at least, probably in more, this city
had shown herself the unconquerable bulwark of North-east Italy; and now,
so long was the investment by the Huns vainly protracted, that it seemed
as if she would once more prove her title to that name. Attila was about
to abandon the siege in despair, when suddenly looking up, he beheld the
storks collecting their young broods about them and preparing to fly
from the city. The omen struck him. He pointed it out to his soldiers,
and in a short, inspiriting speech, urged them to renew their attack on
a city which, as the heaven-guided instinct of the birds told them, was
doomed to ruin. The appeal was fatally successful. The fierce Huns once
more moved their engines against the walls; they effected a practicable
breach; they swarmed in; they slew, they pillaged, they ravished. The
rage of Attila at his long detention before the walls made the usual
savagery of Tartar destruction more savage; and soon there was nothing
left of Aquileia—its Mint, its Baths, its Theatres—but a smoking heap of
ruins. Tradition says that Attila caused a mound to be raised at Udine,
twenty miles distant, and stood on the top of it to see the flames ascend
from the burning city.

[Sidenote: _Other Adriatic cities ruined._]

[Sidenote: _Founders of Venice._]

All the sister cities, beautiful and stately, which were mirrored in the
waters of the North-western Adriatic, shared the fate of Aquileia. The
Roman colony of Concordia; Altinum, with its fair white villas; Patavium,
the birthplace of Livy, were levelled with the ground. A few trembling
fugitives from all these cities, including, perhaps, some from Aquileia
herself, sought shelter in the wide lagoons at the mouths of the Piave
and the Brenta. These miserable refugees founded a gorgeous city, whose
fame spread far and wide over all lands, and whose merchandise was sold
even on those dreary plains of Central Asia over which Attila’s ancestors
once wandered. She was the affianced City of the Sea—Venice.

[Sidenote: _Attila at Milan._]

Attila marched westwards through the broad green plain which we now
call Lombardy, and as he went his fury somewhat abated. All the cities,
Verona, Pavia, Milan, and the rest opened their gates to him; and in
all, the Huns plundered at their will, but the lives of the inhabitants
were spared and the buildings were left unburned. At Milan, Attila
saw with contemptuous amusement a picture representing the Scythians
prostrate under the feet of the Eastern and Western Emperors. He allowed
the picture to remain, but ordered an artist to paint on the opposite
wall the King of the Huns seated on his throne, with Theodosius and
Valentinian emptying their sacks of _aurei_ at his feet.

[Sidenote: _Embassy of Pope Leo._]

During all this time abject terror reigned in the City of Rome, where,
and not at Ravenna, the Emperor appears to have been residing. Even the
stout heart of Aetius seems to have failed him, and he is said to have
counselled Valentinian to flee from Italy, probably to the Narbonensian
Gaul, almost the only Western province which was left to Rome. However,
it was decided to try what effect a humble embassy might have in
mitigating the wrath of the terrible Hun. Two of the highest officials
in the Empire were sent on this embassy, and with them went Pope Leo I,
greatest in character and mental gifts of all the men who had yet sat in
the chair of St. Peter, rightly named Leo, for a more lion-hearted man
had not been found even among the Consuls and Emperors of Rome.

[Sidenote: _Its success._]

The embassy found the Hunnish king by the banks of the Mincio, probably
not far from the city of Mantua. Strange to say, they won a peaceful and
easy victory. ‘[85]He laid aside his fury and excitement, and returning
by the way that he had come, that is to say beyond the Danube, he
departed with the promise of peace, uttering, however, this one warning
and threat above all others, that he would bring yet heavier calamities
upon Italy unless they sent to him Honoria, with the portion of the
Imperial treasure which was her due.’ We shall probably seek in vain for
any reasons of state-craft which could have induced Attila thus to forego
the supreme prize of barbarian conquest, the sack of Rome, when victory
lay ready to his hand. Apparently the reason assigned by contemporary
chroniclers is the true one. It was the influence exerted over him by
the saintly majesty of Leo, which induced him to sheathe the sword and
to be satisfied with promise of tribute when he might have grasped the
reality of plunder. There was in Attila’s character, with all its brutal
savageness, something almost like magnanimity, a certain readiness, when
his own greatness was acknowledged and when his enemy had humbled himself
in the dust before him, to accept his humiliation, and if he trampled,
not to trample him to death. There was also in his heathen soul some
capacity of being impressed by those whose spirits really rose above
the clash of the kingdoms of the world, into the serener air of the
Kingdom of God. There may possibly have been mingled with this feeling a
remembrance of the premature death of Alaric which followed so soon upon
his conquest of the Eternal City, and a fear that he too, if he sacked
Rome, might find his grave in Italy.

Whatever the cause, there can be no doubt that the success of Pope Leo,
when the Emperor and the Master of the Soldiery confessed that they saw
only ruin before them, profoundly stirred the hearts of the Roman people.
The events of the year 452 contributed enormously to raise the Vatican
above the Palatine, and to give the Pope the moral, if not yet the
political, sovereignty of Rome.

[Sidenote: _Death of Attila, 453._]

If Attila had planned for himself the luxury of another raid upon
Italy in 453, his schemes were suddenly and unexpectedly frustrated.
In addition to the many wives whom he already possessed, he married a
beautiful damsel named Ildico. At the wedding banquet he drank copiously,
and afterwards slept the sleep of intoxication. In the midst of it he was
attacked by a violent bleeding from the nose, which proved fatal to him
in his drunken stupor. That same night, it is said, the brave Emperor
Marcian had a dream, in which he saw the bow of Attila broken.

[Sidenote: _The Hunnish power broken. 454._]

The great Hunnish king received a magnificent burial from his people.
Three coffins, one of gold, one of silver, one of iron, enclosed his
body, but the precise place of his burial was kept a secret. After his
death the ascendancy which by his own tremendous force of character he
had been able to exert over many subject nations, suddenly vanished. His
sons proposed to partition his realm among themselves. The auxiliary
peoples resented the proposal: the great confederacy was broken up:
Ostrogoths, Gepidae, and Heruli met the young Hunnish kings in battle by
the Pannonian river Netad. Attila’s sons were beaten, his first-born
slain, the rest put to flight. Ernak, his father’s favourite, became a
subject-ally of the Eastern Emperor, and ruled at the mouth of the Danube.

But the great Hunnish Empire after its short and terrible day of dominion
was now a thing of the past, a vanished nightmare of the nations. The
fierce Hun had himself built nothing that endured, though indirectly he
had contributed to three of the greatest changes in Europe,—the ‘making
of England,’ the establishment of the Papal Supremacy, the foundation of
Venice.




LECTURE VII.

GAISERIC.


We have seen that though the north-east corner of Italy was cruelly
ravaged by the Huns, the Eternal City herself escaped the degradation
of their presence as conquerors. But the blow, which had been averted
by the embassy of Pope Leo, fell three years later (455), the agents
of destruction being now, not the Huns, but the VANDALS. I purposely
abstained in my last lecture from making any but the slightest allusion
to the Vandal conquest of Africa (428-439), though that was in fact
one of the most important events under the government of Placidia, and
certainly the event which produced the most permanently disastrous
consequences for Rome.

[Sidenote: _Early history of the Vandals._]

If we go back from the fifth century after Christ to the first, we shall
find that the Vandals were then dwelling not far from the Baltic coast in
the countries which we now call West Prussia and Posen. A little later
on, sharing the general southward movement of all these races, they
appear in Silesia and give their name to the _Vandalici Montes_, which
are the same that are now called Riesengebirge, the Mountains of the
Giants. Possibly there may be in the new name some dim remembrance of
the old, for we are told[86] that the Vandals, as well as the Gepidae,
were nearly allied in blood to the Goths, and like them were tall of
stature, fair-skinned, yellow-haired, and handsome.

In the reign of Marcus Aurelius (171) we find them in the plains of
Hungary warring against the Romans. Three years later they have become
the allies of Rome, and this attitude of friendship towards the Empire
is generally maintained by them for more than two centuries (174-406).
Especially was this the case in the latter part of the reign of the
Emperor Constantine (330), when the Vandals had suffered a terrible and
well-nigh exterminating defeat at the hands of their Gothic kindred,
by the banks of the river Marisia. The survivors of that terrible day
humbly pleaded for permission to enter the province of Pannonia on the
western shore of the Danube, and there to dwell as _foederati_ under
the protection of the Empire. For more than sixty years they faithfully
observed this treaty. This was probably the time in which they embraced
the Christian faith under that Arian form of it which Ulfilas had
preached to the Goths. Many of their chiefs doubtless entered the service
of the Emperors as life-guardsmen, and it was probably in this way that
the father of the great Stilicho, though a Vandal, rose high enough to
prepare a splendid position for his son.

[Sidenote: _The Vandals enter Gaul, 406._]

The calumniators of Stilicho attributed to him, probably most unjustly,
a share in the next development of Vandal history. It came to pass in
the year 406, in the interval of suspense between the first and second
invasions of Alaric, and just after the exhausting campaign with the
terrible Radagaisus, that (as has been already mentioned) three great
barbarian hordes, taking advantage of the defenceless state of the
Rhine-frontier, denuded of its legions for the defence of Italy, poured
westwards into the provinces of Gaul. These three tribes were the
_Suevi_, a name of puzzling indefiniteness, once including almost all
the High-German family of nations; the _Alans_, a Tartar horde who had
come into Europe at the same time as the Huns, but had pressed further
westwards than their kinsmen; and the _Vandals_.

[Sidenote: _War with the Franks._]

If Stilicho had anything whatever to do with the invitation or the
permission given to these barbarian hordes to enter Gaul, it is
probable[87] that he did it in the hope of finding in them a counterpoise
to the Franks, who were already appearing with menacing strength in the
north-eastern provinces of that country. At any rate the Franks are the
only enemy that we hear of as attempting to bar their way. A great battle
was fought, in which Godigisclus, the Vandal king, fell with 20,000 of
his followers, and only the timely intervention of Respendial, King of
the Alans, saved the Vandals from utter destruction.

[Sidenote: _Three years of ravage, 407-409._]

Of the three years which followed (407-409) we know nothing, but must
imagine the three confederated nations marching up and down in Gaul
during that period, slaying and plundering at their will. Then, by the
internal discords of the Empire, a fresh prospect of rapine was opened
out before them. The British usurper, Constantine, who had penetrated
with his legions into Spain, found his precarious throne undermined by
one of his officers named Gerontius, who proclaimed his son Maximus
Emperor. While usurper and sub-usurper were quarrelling, the defence of
the Empire, which both pretended to maintain, was neglected. The passes
of the Pyrenees, which had hitherto been easily and faithfully guarded,
were left open to the enemy, and the three confederate nations marching
through them, found the rich and fruitful peninsula of Spain, which had
enjoyed four centuries of unbroken peace, at their mercy. The day of the
month, even the day of the week of this terrible invasion, was recorded
by the Spanish chroniclers, faithfully reproducing the deep dint which it
had made on the memories of their countrymen.

[Sidenote: _The Vandals and their confederates enter Spain, 28 Sept.
409._]

[Sidenote: _413._]

‘In this year’ (409) ‘the Alani and Wandali and Suevi entered the
provinces of Spain, on the 28th of September, on the third day of the
week[88].’ After wandering about for some time, enjoying the luxury
of promiscuous pillage, they divided the country in some rough
fashion between them, the Suevi taking to themselves Gallicia in the
north-western corner of Spain, the Alans, Lusitania on the west and the
province of Carthagena on the east. The Vandals were divided into two
branches, the smaller of whom, the Asdingi, dwelt in Gallicia near to
the Suevi, while the powerful clan of the Silingi occupied the fertile
province of Baetica in the south. To these entered, four years after,
the Visigoths under Ataulfus: and by these four, or if we choose so to
consider them, five barbarian nations, as well as by the Roman garrisons
in the strong cities which remained like islands amid the barbarian
flood, the hapless provinces of Spain were ruled and plundered. Famine
soon followed in the train of war. Women were accused of eating their own
children: and some Visigothic soldiers bought of some Vandals a small
mug-full of wheat for an aureus (= 12 shillings).

[Sidenote: _Internecine war between the barbarians in Spain, 413-428._]

I need not trouble you with the details of the wars which raged in
Spain from 413 to 428. The Visigoths were generally in alliance with
the Empire, and fought their fellow-barbarians, especially the Vandals,
with whom they had a long-standing family quarrel, with a ferocity which
astonished the Romans. First the Silingian Vandals in Baetica and then
the Alans sustained crushing defeats at their hands: and the scanty
remnants of these tribes joined themselves to the Asdingian Vandals,
who under their king Gunderic, son of Godigisclus, had now, from the
most insignificant, become the most powerful nation in the Peninsula,
especially as the Visigoths at this time seem to have withdrawn most
of their men north of the Pyrenees, being intent on building up their
dominion in Southern Gaul.

[Sidenote: _The Vandals occupy Andalusia, 420._]

[Sidenote: _Death of King Gunderic, 427._]

[Sidenote: _Accession of Gaiseric._]

In 420 the Asdingian Vandals, with their dependents the Alans marched
across Spain and took up their quarters in the fertile Baetica, where
their kinsmen formerly dwelt. In 422, Gunderic won a decisive victory
over Castinus, the Roman Master of the Soldiery, leaving 20,000 Imperial
soldiers dead upon the field. In 425 he took the great city of Hispalis
(Seville), and fitted out a naval expedition for the conquest of the
Balearic Islands. In 427 Gunderic died,—‘attacked by a demon,’ says a
Spanish chronicler, ‘by the just judgment of God, to punish him for
having stretched forth his hand against the Church of Seville,’ and
he was succeeded by GAISERIC[89], the illegitimate son of his father
Godigisclus.

[Sidenote: _Gaiseric invited by Count Bonifacius to enter Africa, 427._]

Such was the position of affairs in Spain when a messenger came from
Bonifacius, Count of Africa, inviting the Vandals to cross the sea
and wrest that province from the Empire. The cause of this strange
proposition is fully told us by one historian[90], writing a hundred
years after the event, and though accurate and trustworthy for his own
times, very apt to confuse persons and places of which he had no personal
knowledge. His narrative has been lately subjected to a severe analysis
by a great master of historical criticism[91], who has shown how many
questionable elements it contains. Still, in the absence of all other
information, it holds the field, and I will therefore, with this caution,
tell the story in the words of Procopius himself.

[Sidenote: _Procopius’s story of the rivalry between Aetius and
Bonifacius._]

‘The calamity of Africa came to pass in this fashion. There were two
Roman generals, Aetius and Bonifacius, both able men, and in knowledge
of the art of war second to none of their time. Between these men
jealousies arose as to the government of the Empire: but so great were
their magnanimity and other virtues that if any one were to call each
of them the last of the Romans he would not be far from the truth, so
completely had all the glory of Rome become merged in these two men. One
of these two men, Bonifacius, Placidia set over the whole of Africa,
hereby offending Aetius, who, however, did not show his displeasure, for
the ill-feeling between them had not yet produced an open rupture, but
was hidden under the mask of friendship.

‘Now when Bonifacius had departed for Africa, Aetius began to calumniate
him to Placidia as a man who aspired to the Imperial dignity and would
wrest Africa from her and the Emperor. He assured her that it would
not be difficult to bring this matter to the test, for if she summoned
Bonifacius to Rome, he would not come. When the lady heard this, she
approved and followed the advice of Aetius. The latter, however, had
previously written secretly to Bonifacius that the Emperor’s mother was
laying snares for his destruction, and as a token of the truth of his
assertion he told him that he would find himself without cause suddenly
recalled. Hearkening to this warning of Aetius but keeping a profound
silence concerning it, when the messengers arrived to invite him to the
Imperial Court he declared that he would not obey the Emperor or his
mother either. Placidia, on the receipt of this news, looked upon Aetius
as a most faithful servant of the throne, but regarded Bonifacius with
suspicion. The latter, feeling himself unable to cope with the power of
the Emperor, yet accounting himself a doomed man if he started for Rome,
began to consider how he could attach the Vandals to his cause, who had
obtained possession of the neighbouring province of Spain. Bonifacius,
then, having sent to Spain certain of the most influential of his
friends, concluded a treaty on terms of equality with both the sons of
Godigisclus, to the effect that each of them should receive a third part
of Africa, and that if any one of the three were attacked in war, his
danger should be shared by the other two.’

[Sidenote: _War between Vandals and Suevi._]

[Sidenote: _428. Numbering of the people._]

So far Procopius. It will be seen that he makes Bonifacius send his
invitation to both Kings of the Vandals, but if this were so, certainly
before the departure of the host from Spain, Gunderic was dead and
Gaiseric was sole ruler of his nation. While he was engaged in his
preparations for departure, the King of the Suevi made a devastating
inroad on the northern part of the Vandal possessions. To show that he
was not yet to be thus contumeliously ignored even on Spanish territory,
Gaiseric suspended his African projects for a while, turned round and
inflicted on the Suevi a bloody defeat, after which their king was
drowned in the waters of the Gaudiana. Then resuming his plans for the
descent upon Africa, he collected his people (or rather his two peoples,
for he was now always saluted as King of the Vandals and Alans) upon the
sunny Andalusian shore. Here in the month of May, 428[92], he had his
nation-army numbered, and found all the males, including old men and
little children, to amount to 80,000. Another computation, which it is
difficult to reconcile with this unless the limits of age for military
service were very wide, makes the warriors alone amount to 50,000 men.

[Sidenote: _The Vandals transported to Africa._]

The ships which Bonifacius, Count of Africa, supplied from the great port
of Carthage, co-operating with the little fleet of Gaiseric, carried this
great mass of persons, certainly not fewer than 160,000 in number, to
the African coast and landed them, probably in the province of Numidia.
Thus was the dream of Alaric realised by another German chieftain, and
thus did the intrigues and counter-intrigues of Roman officials enable
a Teutonic invader to strike at Rome in her most vulnerable point, the
great grain-producing provinces of Africa.

[Sidenote: _428. Bonifacius repents of his treason and is reconciled to
Placidia._]

Scarcely had the Vandals landed on the African coast when the alliance
between them and Bonifacius, born of treachery and misunderstanding,
died in the daylight of truth. To resume the narrative of Procopius.
‘All those at Rome who were well acquainted with Bonifacius, reflecting
on his character and the extreme improbability of his being so far
carried away by the desire of reigning, were filled with wonder at what
had taken place. Some of these persons, by order of Placidia, proceeded
to Carthage, conversed with Bonifacius, saw the letters of Aetius, and
understanding the whole intrigue returned with all speed to Rome and
explained the position in which Bonifacius had been placed. Placidia,
filled with astonishment, did not dare openly to blame Aetius, so great
was his power and so necessary his help, in the lamentable state into
which the Empire was falling. But calling for the friends of Bonifacius,
she explained to them the secret counsels of Aetius, and binding them
to secrecy by an oath adjured them, if it were possible, to recall him
to the love of his country, and not to allow the Roman Empire to fall
under the yoke of the barbarians. When Bonifacius understood all these
things, he was filled with repentance for his late designs and for the
treaty which he had made with the barbarians, and besought them, with the
lure of many promises, that they would depart from Africa. But as the
Vandals would not listen to his words, but rather taunted him with his
broken faith towards them, he was forced to engage in battle with them,
and being defeated withdrew to Hippo Regius, a very strong city by the
sea-coast of Numidia.

[Sidenote: _Siege of Hippo, June, 430 to July, 431._]

‘As the Vandals after a long time could neither take Hippo by storm nor
induce it to surrender, and were moreover themselves beginning to suffer
from hunger, they broke up the siege. Not long after, Bonifacius and the
Romans under his command joined forces with an army sent from Byzantium
under the command of Aspar, and dared to try the fortune of war in a
great pitched battle, but being much inferior to the enemy, they fled
whither they could, and Aspar returned to his own land. But Bonifacius
betook himself to the Court of Placidia, and there completely purged
himself of the suspicions which had been entertained of him.’

[Sidenote: _432._]

From other sources we learn that Placidia not only forgave Bonifacius
but received him into high favour, and conferred upon him the dignity
of Master of the Soldiery. Apparently he would have supplanted Aetius
in his position of Chief Counsellor of the Empress and virtual ruler
of the Empire, but at this moment Aetius returned with his army from a
victorious campaign against the Franks, and joined battle with his foe.
Aetius was defeated, but Bonifacius lost his life, according to one
account, in single combat with his rival, and, strange to say, in the act
of dying, adjured his wife to re-marry with Aetius if the death of _his_
wife should make such wedlock possible, as he and no other of living
Romans was worthy to be the successor as he had been the conqueror of
Bonifacius.

[Sidenote: _Strange character of this story._]

The whole story of the rivalry of these two Imperial generals is strange,
romantic, almost self-contradictory. Contemporary annalists scarcely
mention it; later historians tell us a good deal which it is hardly
possible that they could have known. We should be disposed to send it
back into the region of romance, to which it seems properly to belong,
but for this one clear and all-important fact—that the Roman governor of
Africa did himself promote the passage of the Vandals into his province,
and only when it was too late and the irretrievable mischief was done,
turned against them, and by vain threats and vainer promises, sought to
persuade them to leave the fruitful land into which he had given them
entrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Result of the Vandal migrations._]

Thus, then, at length were the dwellers by the Elbe and the Oder
settled on the southern shore of the Mediterranean. In 406 they were in
Pannonia, in 439 in Carthage. Thirty-three years, the ordinary length of
a generation, had brought them from Austria to Tunis, and in their way
they had ravaged Languedoc and set up a short-lived kingdom in Andalusia.
Remembering always that it was not a mere army, but a nation, which thus
roamed over mountains and rivers and changed its place of abode from
continent to continent, we feel that the period of history of which we
are now treating is indeed well named by the Germans _Völker-wanderung_,
‘the migration of the nations.’

[Sidenote: _Death of St. Augustine during the siege of Hippo, 28 Aug.
430._]

[Sidenote: ‘_Vandalism._’]

The siege of Hippo Regius (Bona), which has been already alluded to by
Procopius, lasted for a little more than thirteen months (June 430 to
July 431), and was, as has been already said, one of the few failures
of the Vandals. It was memorable in the history of the Church, because
the Bishop of Hippo—the greatest of all the bishops of the African
Church—St. Augustine, was present within the city at its commencement,
and died in the third month of the blockade. His biographer, Possidius,
Bishop of Calama, was with him at the end; and from his hand we have an
interesting picture of the venerable old man’s last days, sitting, as he
did, surrounded by bishops from the whole province of Africa, who had
seen their cities burned, their churches levelled with the ground, the
fruit-trees of the agriculturists torn up by the roots. It was the fury
of this first onslaught, and the especial delight taken by the heretical
barbarians in the destruction of churches, which caused their name to
become a synonym for the demolishers of beautiful buildings. Practically,
when we speak of Vandalism, we now generally think of some brutal outrage
perpetrated on a temple or a statue; and this in the fifth century would
be more probably the work of fanatic monk than of Vandal barbarian.
But the deeds of the followers of Gaiseric during the first fury of
their conquest, and afterwards, were sufficiently brutal to excuse the
opprobrium which the usage of fourteen centuries has linked indissolubly
with their name.

[Sidenote: _Temporary peace with the Empire, 11 Feb. 435._]

After seven years of desolating warfare, peace was concluded between
Gaiseric and the Empire. Aetius no doubt recognised that the fatal
work of Bonifacius could not be undone, nor the 50,000 Vandal and Alan
warriors (reinforced probably by many Moorish nomads and ruined Roman
Provincials) be forced to relinquish their prey. On his part Gaiseric had
had enough of plundering; he wished now to occupy and to rule, and he
meant to make the Romans pay a costly price for the peace which he was
willing to concede to them. The strong city of Hippo, which he had failed
to conquer by force of arms, became his as the result of negotiation. He
had Numidia and the larger part of the African territory secured to him
as his lawful possession, perhaps on the promised payment of a yearly
tribute[93] to the Emperor, and he had to promise to leave unmolested
Carthage, the capital of the Roman Diocese and that part of the Province
which immediately adjoined it, a rich and fertile district certainly,
and the gem of the whole dominion. His son Huneric was sent to Rome as a
hostage for the fulfilment of this condition.

[Sidenote: _Gaiseric pounces on Carthage, 19 Oct. 439._]

The peace seemed like a confession of something like failure on the
part of the Vandal conqueror. But he had only ‘recoiled in order to
make a bolder spring.’ He waited his time; on some pretence or other he
obtained the return of his hostage-son, and then, while Aetius was busy
warring with the Visigoths in Gaul, and Attila from his Hungarian village
was beginning to worry Placidia with his embassies and his armaments,
suddenly, on the 19th of October, 439, Gaiseric entered Carthage and made
all the vast wealth of the African capital his own. Torture was freely
used to compel some of the citizens to yield up to him their hidden
stores.

[Sidenote: _Appearance and character of Gaiseric._]

The Vandal king had now reached, apparently, the summit of his ambition.
Lord of the Roman Provinces of Africa and of the great city of Carthage,
he felt himself indeed a king; and whatever title he may have borne
before, he dated his reign—a reign which lasted thirty-seven years—from
this conquest. Like Ataulfus, like Attila (one might add, like Napoleon
and like Wellington), he was somewhat under the usual size, and he
had a limp in his gait owing to a fall from his horse. He was, by the
consenting testimony of all contemporary historians, a man of great
ability, admirably preparing his means to compass the desired ends,
simple in his habits, of few words, patient, and tenacious of purpose;
but on the other hand, sullen in his wrath, covetous, always stirring
up strife and vexing the nations, and absolutely ruthless towards all
who crossed his path[94]. In Alaric, notwithstanding some outbursts of
barbaric rage, there was much that was chivalrous and noble. Even the
dark soul of Attila was irradiated with fitful gleams of generosity
and compassion. But in Gaiseric I do not think we can discern a single
lineament of nobleness. All is hard, cruel, vulgar in his remorseless
soul. Alas that we must add, all is also successful in his life. This
cruel and greedy, but supremely able barbarian succeeded where the nobler
Alaric and the gentler Ataulfus had failed.

[Sidenote: _His maritime power and piratical expeditions._]

His magnificent power of adapting means to ends was well displayed in
the change which he made in the habits of his nation after he had become
master of Carthage. The Vandals, who had dwelt so long on the skirts
of the Riesengebirge, in the highlands of Austria, or in the plains of
Hungary, were essentially an inland people, who only dabbled a little
in seamanship, when they reached the Andalusian shore. But now that the
fleets, the arsenal, the docks of Carthage were all their own, now that
its harbour—one of the finest in the Old World—reflected everywhere
the Vandal flag, they became under Gaiseric’s guidance the first naval
power on the Mediterranean, and he, by a singular anticipation of the
history of the Barbary States in later days, made himself the great
Buccaneer-King. With every returning spring his long ships of war were
made ready in the harbour. Sometimes he ravaged Sicily, sometimes the
southern coasts of Italy, leading the inhabitants of one city into
captivity, throwing down the walls of another, wasting the whole country
with his wide-reaching raids. Then when the very poverty of these lands
frighted him away from their devastated shores, he turned to the Eastern
Empire. Illyricum, Peloponnesus, the islands of the Ionian and Aegean
seas, all that bore the name of Hellas, bewailed the visits of Gaiseric.
Then to Italy and Sicily again, to try if there were any nook which
had hitherto escaped his visitations. At length the work became almost
monotonous, and the choice of a victim hard. Once when the fleet had
weighed anchor and was sailing forth from the broad harbour of Carthage,
the helmsman turned to the king and asked for what port he should steer.
‘For the men with whom God is angry,’ answered the Vandal king, and left
the winds and the waters to settle the question who were the proper
objects of the wrath of Heaven.

[Sidenote: _Vandal land-settlement._]

The land-settlement of the Vandals and the order of succession to the
Vandal throne were two subjects to which Gaiseric’s legislative energies
were especially directed. (1) The rich Province in which Carthage was
situated, called Zeugitana, or the Proconsular Province, the last
of all the acquisitions of the Vandals, was portioned out among the
warriors of the nation, who received these estates as an inheritance
to be transmitted to their children, and who paid no taxes of any kind
for them. In the other Provinces, far larger in extent but not nearly
so fertile in quality, lay the vast domains of Gaiseric and his sons,
consisting of estates forcibly taken away from their Roman owners, often
men of culture and noble birth, who were in some cases compelled to
cultivate as slaves the lands of which the invader had despoiled them.
The poor and barren lands were for the most part left to their former
owners, but so burdened with taxes and obligations of service that the
unhappy possessors could barely make a livelihood out of them. Many of
these unhappy possessors tried to flee, but were arrested and executed,
sundry grievous charges being brought against them, especially the one
unforgivable sin of concealing treasure from Gaiseric. ‘Thus,’ as the
historian[95] says, ‘did the Provincials of Africa fall into every kind
of misery.’

[Sidenote: _Law of succession to the throne._]

(2) As for the succession to the throne, in order to avert the rivalries
and civil wars which often resulted from the elective character of
Teutonic royalty, and at the same time to prevent the crown from being
worn by a fatuous boy like Honorius or Valentinian, he ordained that the
oldest living male among his descendants should, on the death of each
reigning monarch, ascend the Vandal throne. The law was like that which
has regulated the succession of the Ottoman Sultans and the Egyptian
Pashas. It worked smoothly for near sixty years after the death of
Gaiseric, who was succeeded by his eldest son Huneric, he by his two
nephews, Gunthamund and Thrasamund, and the latter of these by his cousin
Hilderic, the son of Huneric. Then dissensions broke out: Hilderic was
dethroned and finally put to death by his cousin Gelimer, but religious
differences—for Gelimer was an Arian and Hilderic a Catholic—were the
chief cause of these disputes, for which I am not sure that we can fairly
blame the Vandal law of succession.

[Sidenote: _Persecution of the Catholics._]

In this allusion to religious differences I have touched upon that
which was the distinguishing and the shameful characteristic of the
Vandal kingdom, especially under Gaiseric and his son; I mean, their
brutal persecution of the Catholics. In their profession of Arianism the
Vandals, as we have seen, only followed the example of all the other
barbarian nations who had embraced Christianity in any form. Naturally
Attila, who worshipped a naked sword, while hating all priests and
coveting their costly Communion-plate, was under no temptation to treat
the orthodox believers in the Homoousion worse than the Arian believers
in the Homoiousion (if any such there yet remained), but would slay both
with ferocious impartiality. Naturally, too, the still heathen ancestors
of Clovis robbed and murdered the Catholic bishops of Belgic Gaul simply
as rich and civilised men, without any special antipathy to them on
account of their Catholicism. With the Visigoths, Suevi, and Burgundians
the case was different. They were parties to the long Arian lawsuit,
and were disposed to depress, and sometimes to harass, the Athanasian
litigants on the other side, but they did not systematically persecute,
and there are few if any instances of Catholics actually put to death by
them for their faith.

Gaiseric, however, seems to have hugged his Arian belief with the
fanatical love of a convert, and to have hated the Nicene Confession
with the bitter hatred of an apostate. It was indeed reported[96] in
Spain that such was the very truth, that he had been once a Catholic
and had ‘apostatised to the Arian infidelity’: but it is difficult to
understand how the son of King Godigisclus can have been brought up in
the Athanasian faith, unless his illegitimate birth permitted him to be
trained by his mother, probably a Gaulish concubine of the king, in the
despised faith of the Roman Provincials.

Whatever the cause there can be no doubt that Gaiseric detested the
Catholic faith, the faith of the vast majority of his new subjects, and
showed that detestation by acts of savage cruelty. The churches were not
merely plundered—that the barbarian hunger for gold would sufficiently
account for—but wantonly burned: and insult was sometimes added to
rapine, as when the beautiful altar-cloths were cut up and made into
shirts and drawers for the grooms of a barbarian officer. In the regions
which paid tribute to the Palace the bishops were accused of stirring up
the people to revolt, and of likening the king to Pharaoh, Holofernes,
and Nebuchadnezzar: and a number of them were sent into exile. The
Bishop of Carthage, with several of his clergy, was sent to sea in a
crazy ship, which it was hoped would founder on the voyage, but arrived
safe but penniless on the shores of Campania. The Metropolitan Church of
Carthage was forbidden to elect any successor to the exile, and seems to
have remained for twenty years or more ‘widowed of its bishop.’ The same
measure was meted out to a great number of African Churches, evidently
with the intention of breaking down their episcopal organisation for ever.

In his own palace Gaiseric seemed as if he could not endure the presence
of an adherent of the rival creed. Sebastian, the son-in-law of
Bonifacius, though a man who was on other grounds acceptable at Court and
influential with the king, was put to death because he refused to change
his religion. Count Armogast, for the same refusal, was stretched upon
the rack, hung head downwards from the ceiling by one foot, and at last
sent to do the work of a ditcher and a shepherd in the fields, where he
soon died of his hardships.

These and many similar stories which are told us by Victor Vitensis,
show the intense and bitter animosity of the great Vandal against all
who refused to accept what the ecclesiastical historians call ‘the
Arian infidelity.’ At the same time they fail to bring before us any
well-concerted and systematic scheme of persecution, which could by
possibility have rooted out the Catholic faith from Africa. Gaiseric was
evidently no Diocletian, with sad thoroughness undertaking to eradicate
a hostile faith in order to fulfil his duty to the State. Nor was he a
Louis XIV, organising dragonnades and revoking edicts of toleration in
order that he might keep his mistresses and yet save his soul. He was
essentially a barbarian, though a clever one, with all that intolerance
of opposition which is shown not by barbarians only when

    ‘Dressed in a little brief authority.’

He could not bear that any of those about him should dare to belong
to any other than ‘the King’s religion,’ and he tortured, degraded,
banished, at last sometimes even killed, in order to punish those who
differed from him for their independence.

Such was the character and such the past career of the founder of the
great Buccaneer State. We have now to glance at the course of events
which, in the year 455, brought him across the sea to Rome.

[Sidenote: _Family relations of Valentinian III._]

Valentinian III, in the year 437, when he had reached the age of
eighteen, went on a visit of state to his cousin, Theodosius II, at
Constantinople, and returned bringing with him that cousin’s daughter as
a bride. She bore the name which, with slight modifications, had been
borne by two previous generations of Imperial ladies in the palace at
Constantinople, Eudoxia or Eudocia. Of this marriage there was no male
issue, but two daughters were born to the Imperial pair, Eudoxia and
Placidia.

[Sidenote: _His jealousy of Aetius._]

On the death of Attila (453) the thought, the base thought, began to
insinuate itself into the mind of Valentinian that he had now less need
of the services of the great minister, Aetius. Men called that minister
‘the great safeguard of the Western Commonwealth and the terror of
Attila[97].’ His praises were sung with wearisome repetition, and the
very presence of the strenuous, care-worn warrior was an oppression and
a rebuke to the frivolous Emperor who ‘reigned but did not govern.’
The growing dislike, now that the wise Placidia was laid in the grave,
could be fostered at their pleasure by the mischief-making lacqueys of
the palace, and one of these, the eunuch Heraclius, for ever seeming
to anticipate the Emperor’s wishes, and really making him the tool of
his own base designs, had begun to talk of possible means of freeing
Valentinian from the yoke of his minister and making him master in his
own house. Hints of treachery reached the ears of Aetius, and to secure
himself he pressed the Emperor to exchange with him solemn oaths of
mutual faith. At the same time a scheme which had probably been for some
time talked of, and which seemed to promise the undisturbed succession to
the throne of a hero’s son, received its final ratification. Valentinian
promised to give one of his daughters in marriage to Gaudentius[98], the
son of Aetius.

[Sidenote: _454. Valentinian murders Aetius._]

Such was the state of affairs, a hollow crust of reconciliation and
plighted vows over the red-hot lava of hatred and suspicion, when one
day Aetius entered the palace and had an interview with the Emperor.
He spoke of the covenant entered into between them: he perhaps urged
the completion of the marriage at once, and hinted that his master was
seeking to evade the fulfilment of his promise. Valentinian was, or
feigned to be, enraged against his importunate petitioner. He struck
Aetius a blow: the swords of the surrounding courtiers, we are told,
‘cruelly finished the work.’ The last of the Romans was lying dead at the
feet of one of the meanest of the Caesars. Along with Aetius fell one of
his friends, bearer of a name destined to European celebrity,—Boetius,
an ancestor of the author of the ‘Consolation of Philosophy.’

Soon after the foul deed had been done Valentinian asked a Roman nobleman
if he had done well in slaying Aetius. ‘Well done, or ill done, most
noble Augustus, I am hardly able to decide. But I know one thing, that
you have chopped off your right hand with your left.’

[Sidenote: _Vengeance on Valentinian. 455._]

The death of Aetius, which probably occurred towards the end of 454,
remained not long unavenged. Valentinian, who with all his many vices
does not appear to have been a coward, allowed the friends and retainers
of the murdered man to approach him without hindrance. He supposed
that what his flatterers told him was true, and that the deed of the
Emperor of Rome would be accepted as if it were the decree of heaven by
his adoring subjects. Little did he know the longing for revenge which
filled the hearts of the barbarian guardsmen of Aetius, who, like the
_Comitatus_ of a German chief, deemed themselves for ever disgraced
by the unrequited murder of their lord. On the 16th of March, 455,
Valentinian rode forth from the City to a place called ‘the Two Laurels,’
to watch some contest (perhaps a wrestling match) which was going
forward. While he was intent on the spectacle two henchmen of Aetius,
named Optila and Thraustila[99]—their names reveal their barbarian
origin—approached and ‘stabbed him with unexpected blows[100].’ The
eunuch Heraclius, who had been his accomplice in the murder of Aetius,
was slain at the same time.

[Sidenote: _Accession of Maximus._]

[Sidenote: _His marriage with Eudoxia._]

[Sidenote: _455._]

With the death of Valentinian the dynasty of Theodosius came to an end,
his cousin Pulcheria, the Augusta at Constantinople, having died two
years before (453). The person who was chosen to succeed him was Maximus,
an elderly Senator, a man who had been twice Consul, and had filled
various offices of the State with credit and distinction. The hopes which
had been formed of a wise and honourable administration of the affairs
of the Republic by the new Emperor were, however, soon disappointed.
Maximus not only left the murder of his predecessor unavenged: he even
seemed ostentatiously to court the society of the murderers, thus
definitely enrolling himself as a partisan of the family of Aetius and
an antagonist of the probably still numerous adherents of the Theodosian
house. He carried this partisanship to such lengths as to suggest to
the minds of his subjects that he had himself been privy to the death
of his predecessor. The suspicion was probably unfounded, but the mere
fact that it was widely entertained must have been fatal to the moral
ascendency of the new Emperor. Moreover he compelled the beautiful widow
of Valentinian, who was still truly mourning her unworthy husband, to
accept his hand in marriage, and proposed to marry his son Palladius
to her daughter, Placidia. If he hoped thus to consolidate his dynasty
by a double union with the family of his predecessor, he was bitterly
disappointed. Eudoxia was wounded in her affections by the indecent
haste with which she had been compelled to accept this elderly and
commonplace civil servant instead of the brilliant, if worthless, husband
of her youth. She was wounded in her pride by a marriage, or rather by
two marriages, deemed by her to be beneath the dignity of that great
Theodosian house to which she belonged by a double title, and which had
now for three quarters of a century been, in the flattering dialect of
the Court, ‘domus divina.’

[Sidenote: _Eudoxia invokes the aid of Gaiseric._]

Like her sister-in-law Honoria, in her rage and despair she looked to
the barbarian for aid. She found means to send a messenger to Gaiseric,
inviting him to attack Rome and deliver her from shameful bondage. The
messenger found the Vandal king in no unwilling mood. Most likely he had
often discussed with himself the probabilities of success or failure in
the most brilliant enterprise that ambition and avarice could suggest to
a Teutonic warrior: and now all doubts were removed by the knowledge that
Rome’s powers of resistance, feeble at the best, would be paralysed by
internal dissensions. His ships were no doubt all equipped in readiness
for his usual spring-tour of desolation: he had but to give to the
waiting pilot the word of command, ‘for Rome.’

[Sidenote: _Gaiseric sets sail for Rome, June, 455._]

[Sidenote: _Flight and death of Maximus._]

The Vandal fleet reached the mouth of the Tiber in the early days of
June (455); but already, three days before their arrival, the reign of
Maximus, which lasted only about ten or eleven weeks, had come to an
end. The rumour of the impending invasion, fears of domestic treachery,
the unconcealed scorn and hatred of Eudoxia, quite unnerved the elderly
Emperor, who, after publishing a proclamation granting liberty to leave
the City to all who desired to do so, himself claimed the permission
which he had accorded to his subjects and stole away from the palace.
As soon as his departure was discovered an insurrection broke out. The
servants of the palace, who were all on Eudoxia’s side, followed and
overtook the fugitive. According to the ghastly precedent set in the
case of Rufinus, they tore him limb from limb, dragged the pieces of his
body through the streets of Rome and hurled them contemptuously into
the Tiber. Already, in the general ruin of society, the men who called
themselves Romans were showing themselves even more barbarous than the
barbarians.

[Sidenote: _Surrender of the City._]

[Sidenote: _455. Plunder of Rome._]

A city thus left without a ruler, and probably divided against itself,
(the enemies and the friends of the late Theodosian dynasty regarding one
another with hatred and fear,) could offer no effectual resistance, and
appears to have offered no resistance at all, to the mighty Vandal. Once
more the expedient of Papal intercession was resorted to, but this time
with only partial success. When Pope Leo with his clergy met Gaiseric
outside the Porta Portuensis the conqueror agreed—no doubt on condition
that his entry should be unopposed—to spare the lives of the inhabitants,
to set fire neither to church, palace, nor private dwelling, and to
abstain from the use of torture for the discovery of hidden wealth.
These conditions being observed, there was to be no limit to the Vandal
capacities for spoliation. ‘For fourteen days,’ says an annalist[101],
‘with secure and unhindered investigation, Rome was stripped of all her
wealth.’ Temple and Christian church were impartially plundered. Half of
the gilded roof of the Temple of Capitolian Jove, the Communion-plate of
all the great basilicas, statues from forum and hippodrome and villa, the
crown and jewelled ornaments of Theodosius and his posterity, even the
seven-branched candlestick and the table of the shew-bread which Titus
had brought from ruined Jerusalem, these and endless other treasures
were borne during those fourteen days of leisurely spoliation along the
Via Portuensis and stowed away in the capacious holds of the Vandal
galleys[102]. The vessel which bore the statues and other treasures of
art most unfortunately foundered on the voyage. The spoils of the Jewish
temple reached their destination in safety, and after reposing in the
recesses of the Vandal palace at Carthage for seventy-nine years were
carried to Constantinople to grace the triumph of Belisarius: but the
Roman Emperor Justinian, fearing that these sacred treasures which had
already witnessed the sack of three great cities, Jerusalem, Rome, and
Carthage, bringing ill fortune with them like the Ark of God to the
cities of the Philistines, might also witness the fall of Constantinople,
sent them back to their original home on Mount Moriah, where apparently
they must still have been stored up when Omar, at the head of his true
believers, stormed the Holy City.

[Sidenote: _Gaiseric returns to Africa._]

[Sidenote: _Captivity of Eudoxia and her daughters._]

Gaiseric, having fully accomplished his purpose, not conquest but
plunder, returned to Carthage, laying waste on his way the shores of
Campania and ruining the cities of Capua and Nola. The Empress Eudoxia
and her two daughters were transported to Carthage. The elder daughter,
Eudoxia, was married to Gaiseric’s eldest son, Huneric,—a most miserable
union, since she was a devoted Catholic and her husband a bitter Arian.
In 472, after twenty-seven years of wedlock, she escaped from the hated
land to Jerusalem, and there died, after a few months spent in religious
seclusion, at the Tomb of the Saviour. The Empress Eudoxia and her other
daughter, Placidia, were sent to Constantinople in 462, after seven
years’ captivity, in consideration of a large ransom paid by the Emperor
Leo, who, though no relation of the Theodosian family, felt his dignity
wounded by the detention of the widow and daughter of an Emperor in the
palace of the barbarian.

[Sidenote: _Further fortunes of the Theodosian family._]

Placidia’s husband, a senator named Olybrius, was one of the
‘shadow-Emperors’ whose coming and going marked the last twenty years
of the Empire of the West. In March, 472, he was proclaimed Augustus
by Ricimer, the successor of Stilicho and Aetius in the position of
‘powerful friend’ of the Emperors. In October of the same year he died
of dropsy, having produced no perceptible eddy in the swift downward
current of the fortunes of Rome. A grandson of his and Placidia’s, a
great-grandson of Valentinian III, named also Olybrius, was Consul in
491. His inconspicuous name is the last vestige left in history of the
family of the great Theodosius.

I have overpassed the proper limits of my subject by a few years in
order to trace the fortunes of the Theodosian _family_. The Theodosian
_dynasty_ ended, as we have seen, in March, 455; and that event, with the
immediately succeeding sack of Rome by Gaiseric, is a fitting close to my
narrative.

[Sidenote: _Conclusion._]

In 375, before the Huns had crossed the Dniester, or the fugitive
Visigoths had crowded to the shore of the Danube, beseeching the
hospitality of the Empire, it seemed as if the stately fabric reared
by the Senate and People of Rome, which had already stood for eleven
centuries, might stand for eleven centuries more. In 455, when the
ships of the Vandal king were bearing away the widow and daughters of
an Emperor, the spoils of the city and palace, and a crowd of well-born
captives, to his robber-fortress of Carthage, the sceptre of the great
world-conquering power was broken. Britain, Gaul, Germany, Spain,
Africa, were lost to her dominion. Rome herself had twice surrendered
to a barbarian conqueror, and had twice been sacked by his soldiers.
The sacred soil of Italy had for years been trodden under foot by the
armies of the Goth, the Hun, and the Vandal. The Empire’s reputation of
unconquerableness had departed from her, and when Roman and barbarian
met on the battle-field, the expectation in both armies was that the
legions would _not_ be victorious. A long and wonderful existence yet
lay before the New Rome by the Bosphorus, but from the Old Rome by the
Tiber the spell of Empire had for a time departed. Yet already there were
indications in the sky from what quarter her new day would dawn. Already
the majestic figure of Leo betokened the uprising of a new order of men,
the avowed successors of a fisherman of Bethsaida, who should rule over
a wider world than the Roman Empire, and wield a more absolute authority
than had been enjoyed by the proudest of the successors of Augustus.




FOOTNOTES


[1] Greece.

[2] Regulus.

[3] ‘I appeal unto Caesar.’

[4] Strictly speaking the Ulpii, Aelii, Antonini, and Annii. But
Antoninus is the best central name for the dynasty.

[5] The city of Spalato now occupies the site of the palace of
Diocletian, which was built in the neighbourhood of Salona.

[6] Valens.

[7] Cod. Theod. xii. 1, 160. It is Arcadius who uses this expression.

[8] Vegetius (De Re Militari ii. 5).

[9] ‘Nam imperator cum Augusti nomen accepit, tanquam praesenti et
corporali Deo fidelis est praestanda devotio, inpendendus pervigil
famulatus.’

[10] The Computation proceeds in this way. The _Notitia_ enumerates 132
‘Legions’ of foot soldiers and 109 other bodies of infantry, ‘Numeri,’
‘Auxilia,’ and so forth, whose precise strength we cannot ascertain: also
91 ‘Vexillationes,’ ‘Alae,’ &c., of cavalry.

    Taking the 132 Legions at 6100 men we get           805,200
    Taking the 109 Numeri, &c. at 1000 we get           109,000
    Taking the 91 Vexillationes at 600 (the full
        number of a Vexillatio) we get                   54,600
                                                        -------
                                                        968,800

[11] There is an interesting passage in the Greek historian Agathias (who
wrote about 570) which illustrates, if it does not precisely confirm
the view here taken. He says (Hist. v. 13): ‘The armies of the Romans
no longer remained of the size at which they had been originally fixed
by the earlier Emperors, but had dwindled down to a tiny remnant, by
no means adequate to the size of the State. For whereas they ought to
amount in the whole to 645,000 warlike men, they have been now reduced to
little more than 150,000.’ As Agathias wrote under Justinian, after the
greater part of the West had been lost to the Empire, he probably reduced
his figures of ‘paper-strength’ and ‘effectives’ in proportion to the
diminution of the Empire; and if so, he would probably have accepted for
the year 400, when the territories of the sons of Theodosius were still
intact, a result like that mentioned in the text.

[12] Scrinia.

[13] Claudian.

[14] Though this word has lately obtained, chiefly through the influence
of French writers, rather too wide currency, as the polite equivalent of
‘mob,’ a writer on Roman affairs may with better right employ it, as it
is derived from the politics of old Rome. In the _Comitia Centuriata_,
the lowest class of citizens, those who were assessed on a very small
amount of property, and who had little beside their children (_proles_)
wherewith to serve the State, were called _proletarii_. The word seems to
have passed out of use before the close of the Republic.

[15] In this sentence and throughout these lectures I quote actual sums
of money, without attempting to make any correction for the alteration in
its value, that being an element extremely difficult to calculate. There
is no doubt that the purchasing power of the equivalent of £1 sterling
was greater then than now, how much greater it is almost impossible to
say, I conjecture about double.

[16] Perhaps the ration was proportioned to the size of the receiver’s
family, but this we cannot say with certainty.

[17] Cassiodorus, Variarum iii. 51.

[18] ‘Verumque confitentibus latifundia perdidere Italiam: jam vero et
provincias. Sex domini semissem Africae possidebant, cum interfecit eos
Nero princeps.’ Hist. Nat. xviii. 6.

[19] Cod. Theod. ii. 25. ‘Quis enim ferat, liberos a parentibus, a
fratribus sorores, a viris conjuges segregari?’ The date of this law
is not quite certain, but it probably belongs to A.D. 334. There is no
doubt that Constantine was the author of it, and we may therefore fairly
attribute it to Christian influences.

[20] See Fustel de Coulanges, Problèmes de l’Histoire.

[21] Waitz (Deutsche Verfassungsgeschichte i. 30) remarks that ‘Teutonic’
and ‘Deutsch’ have probably no connection with one another.

[22] Norton, Sutton, Easton, Weston, &c.

[23] Laleham, Farnham, Tottenham, &c., but more often with a genitive
plural preceding it. Birmingham (the village of the Beormings),
Buckingham (the village of the Bucings), and so on.

[24] Derby, Danby, Whitby, &c.; Elswick, Alnwick, Chiswick, &c.

[25] The _Ingenui_ of the Latin writers: the _Gemein-freie_ of modern
Germans.

[26] _Faihu-thrains_ (literally cattle-thronging) is Ulfilas’ translation
of Μαμμωνᾶς.

[27] This paragraph is an attempt to explain the following passage of
Tacitus (Germania xxvi) which has been almost as much fought over by
commentators as if it had been a text of Scripture:—

‘Agri pro numero cultorum ab universis in vices occupantur, quos mox
inter se secundum dignationem partiuntur. Facilitatem partiendi camporum
spatia praestant. Arva per annos mutant; et superest ager.’

I follow in some points the interpretation given by Waitz (Deutsche
Verfassungsgeschichte i. 109-113 and 140-148), and Dahn (Geschichte der
deutschen Urzeit i. 171-174); but on the whole the criticism of Fustel de
Coulanges (Problèmes d’Histoire, 263-294) seems to me to penetrate most
deeply into the author’s meaning.

[28] ‘Secundum dignationem partiuntur.’

[29] ‘Et superest ager.’

[30] ‘Arva per annos mutant.’ Perhaps this is meant to convey a different
meaning from ‘per annum.’

[31] De Bello Gallico, iv. 1, vi. 22.

[32] The strongest part of Mr. Seebohm’s book is, I think, his
illustration of the old Teutonic land-tenure by the open fields now or
lately existing at Hitchin. I confess I am not convinced by him that the
open field system and ‘co-aration’ necessarily imply a servile tenure on
the part of the cultivators.

[33] De Bello Gallico iv. 1.

[34] We have a word _Gá_ in English akin to the German _Gau_, but it does
not seem to have been ever extensively used. For the reasons why _shire_
is not precisely appropriate, see Prof. Freeman’s Essay ‘The Shire and
the Gá.’ Have we a trace of the Gau in the names of Linlithgow and
Glasgow?

[35] Bishop Stubbs makes the ‘hundred’ answer to the _pagus_, but as
there were 65 hundreds in Sussex alone, this seems a very small division
to represent the great and important _pagi_ of Caesar and Tacitus.

[36] Compare the ‘Turba regum diversarumque nationum ductores’ of
Jordanes, De Reb. Get. xxxviii.

[37] ‘Reges ex nobilitate, duces ex virtute sumunt’ (Tacitus, Germania
vii).

[38] ‘Colunt discreti ac diversi, ut fons, ut campus, ut nemus placuit’
(ibid. xvi). It seems very likely, as suggested by Seebohm (English
Village Community, p. 339), that this describes rather the settlement of
the chiefs than of the commonalty. This must be stated, however, as a
mere conjecture, as there is nothing in the language of Tacitus on which
to found it.

[39] The story of Clovis and the vase of Soissons, though almost worn
threadbare by frequent repetition, may be quoted as an illustration of
the nature of the power of a German king, strictly limited in peace, but
tending to become absolute in war. Clovis wished to gratify the Bishop
of Rheims by restoring to him a vase which the spoilers had taken from
his church. When the army were all mustered at Soissons with the heap
of plunder before them, he accordingly asked that this vase might be
allotted to him over and above his regular share of the spoil. ‘Glorious
king,’ said the loyal soldiers, ‘we and all that we have are thine,
neither can any one resist thy power.’ But one of the warriors—‘envious
and fickle,’ says the historian, perhaps in his heart resenting the
adulation of his comrades—lifted up his battle-axe and smote upon the
vase, saying, ‘Nothing shalt thou carry away from hence except what a
fair lot give thee.’ The vase was apparently defaced, not broken, and
the king concealing his annoyance handed it to the bishop’s messenger.
At the year’s end, when all the warriors were assembled in the Campus
Martius to show the brightness of their arms, the king, going the round
of his troops, came to the striker of the vase. ‘No one,’ said he, ‘keeps
his arms in such a dirty state as thou dost: neither thy spear, nor thy
shield, nor thy battle-axe is fit to be seen,’ and therewith he wrested
the battle-axe from his hand and threw it to the ground. As the man
stooped to pick it up the king raised his hand on high, and drove his own
battle-axe deep into the warrior’s skull, shouting, ‘Thus at Soissons
didst thou do to that vase.’ Thereupon he ordered all the other warriors
to file off from the field, their hearts being filled with a salutary
dread of his power.

[40] In this connection it is interesting to note that an inscription
has recently been discovered at the Roman Camp of Borcovicus in
Northumberland, which commences ‘Deo Marti Thincso.’ The persons who thus
record the dedication of their altar to the god Mars Thincsus are said to
be ‘Germani Cives Tuihanti.’ Dr. Hübner, one of the greatest authorities
on Roman epigraphy, believes that ‘Mars Thincsus’ is the Teutonic god
Tiu, and that his epithet means that the national _Thing_ or Council was
held under his guardianship. (See Archaeologia Aeliana, x. 154-159.)

[41] ‘Eliguntur in iisdem conciliis et principes, qui jura per pagos
vicosque reddunt’ (Tacitus, Germania xii).

[42] Thiudans is the Gothic word for ‘King.’

[43] In 552, see Jordanes li.

[44] Socrates, iv. 33.

[45] Gothic Irregulars.

[46] Jordanes, De Rebus Geticis xxiv.

[47] ‘Vallis Greuthungorum’ (Ammianus xxxi. 3). Greuthungi seems to have
been another name for the Ostrogoths.

[48] Concord Auggg. (The number of repetitions of the letter g indicates
the number of Emperors.)

[49] Jordanes xxvi: ‘Illico in ducum Lupicini et Maximi armantur
_occisionem_.’

[50] Ammianus.

[51] Cura Palati.

[52] xxiii. 4.

[53] Onager.

[54] Aries.

[55] Helepolis.

[56] ‘Trans Taurum.’ I suppose this is equivalent to ‘per Orientem.’

[57] Ammianus, ‘Efficacia Julii magistri militiae trans Taurum enituit
salutaris et velox.’ Zosimus, Ἰούλιος τοιῷδέ τινι τρόπῳ τὸν ἐπηρτημένον
ταῖς πόλεσιν ἀποσείεται κίνδυνον.

[58] Jordanes xxviii.

[59] Idatius, Descriptio Consulum, makes the entry of Athanaric into
Constantinople 11 Jan. and his death 25 Jan. 381.

[60] ‘Penitus toto divisos orbe Britannos.’

[61] ‘Vir strenuus et probus atque Augusto dignus, nisi contra sacramenti
fidem per tyrannidem emersisset.’ (Historia Miscella xi. 16.)

[62] xxxi. 10, 18 and 19.

[63] Historia Miscella xii. 16.

[64] Magnentius and Valentinian I.

[65] Combined from Zosimus and Philostorgius. Possibly the two stories
relate to different altercations.

[66] Jordanes xxviii.

[67] Zosimus v. 6.

[68] Claudian, De Bello Getico 565-7.

[69]

    ‘Rumpe omnes, Alarice, moras. Hoc impiger anno
    Alpibus Italiae ruptis, _penetrabis ad Urbem_.’

                                         Claudian, De Bello Getico, 545-6.

[70] Partly founded, however, on the experience of Theodoric in Thrace as
described by Malchus. (See Italy and her Invaders, Book IV. cap. 3.)

[71] ‘Non est ista pax, sed pactio servitutis.’

[72] He was Praefectus Praetorio under Attalus, 409.

[73] Zosimus v. 33.

[74] Or ‘your souls.’

[75] Zosimus v. 38.

[76] ‘Consanguineo,’ Jord. xxx.

[77] Morning-gift.

[78] In several points of his military career, Aetius seems to me a not
unworthy precursor of Belisarius.

[79] With a short interval of exile in Hunland, 433.

[80] Jordanes xxxv.

[81] ‘Bellorum quidem amator, sed ipse manu temperans.’

[82] Suidas.

[83] ‘Turba regum’ (Jordanes xxxviii). Compare the story of Talma playing
to a _parquet_ of Kings in the days of Napoleon.

[84] ‘Bellum atrox, multiplex, immane, pertinax.’ Jordanes xl.

[85] Jordanes.

[86] By Procopius, de Bello Vandal. i. 2.

[87] As suggested by Papencordt, Geschichte der Vandalen, p. 339.

[88] Idatius. ‘Alani et Wandali et Suevi Hispanias ingressi: alii quarto
Kalendas [28 Sept.], alii tertio Idus Octobris [13 Oct.] memorant die,
tertiâ feriâ.’ Tillemont points out that the 28th September in that year
fell on a Tuesday, but the 13th October on a Wednesday. Very likely
the fifteen days’ difference between the two calculations denotes the
interval between the passage of the van and the rear of the invading host.

[89] Often called Genseric by modern historians, but there is no doubt
that Gaiseric is the more correct form of the name, and it is the one now
generally adopted by German scholars.

[90] Procopius.

[91] Professor Freeman, in the English Historical Review for July, 1887.

[92] The date commonly given is 429, but there are authorities also for
427 and 428, and upon the whole this last date appears the most probable.

[93] Procopius asserts this.

[94] This character is chiefly taken from Jordanes, cap. 33.

[95] Procopius.

[96] Idatius mentions this report: ‘Gaisericus qui, ut aliquorum relatio
habet, effectus apostata de fide Catholicâ, in Arianam dictus est
transisse perfidiam.’

[97] Marcellinus Comes, s. a. 454.

[98] Or possibly Carpilio. We are not quite sure of the name.

[99] Or Accila and Trasila (Continuator Prosperi). Trasila is here said
to have been a son-in-law of Aetius.

[100] ‘Insperatis et inopinatis ictibus confoderunt.’

[101] Prosper.

[102] We are not distinctly told that the fleet of Gaiseric lay at
anchor off Portus, but this is rather more probable than that they were
at Ostia. It is quite possible, however, that the fleet may have been
divided between the two ports when it was plain that there was to be no
opposition. This would enable the Vandals to load much more cargo during
the fourteen days, which on any hypothesis seems rather a short time for
the immense amount of business transacted in them.




INDEX.

_(Modern place-names in Italics._)


  A.

  Ad Salices (the Willows), battle of, 94.

  Aemona (_Laybach_), 127, 131, 153.

  Aequitius, Superintendent of the Palace, 100.

  Aetius, 178, 191-210, 225, 226.

  Agathias, 40 _n._, 41 _n._

  Agentes in Rebus, 42.

  Alamanni, 25, 74.

  Alani, 124, 152, 182, 196, 206.

  Alaric, 131, 137-168.

  Alatheus the Ostrogoth, 96, 97.

  Alavivus, 87, 91.

  Ambrose, St., 122.

  Ammianus Marcellinus, 45, 47, 49, 102, 124.

  Angles, 183.

  Anianus, Bishop of Paris, 194.

  Antioch, 23, 118-120.

  Aquileia—besieged by Attila, 198.

  Arbogast, 110, 128-132.

  Arcadius, 36 _n._, 117, 134, 141, 142, 153, 155.

  Ardaburius the Alan, 177.

  Ardaric, King of the Gepidae, 196.

  Arian controversy, 31.

  Ariminum, plains of, 164, 172.

  Aristocracy of Rome, not theoretically hereditary, 8;
    manners of, in fourth century, 47-48.

  Armogast, Count, 224.

  Army, Roman, size of, in the fourth century, 39-40.

  Ascholius, Bishop of Thessalonica, 109.

  Aspar the Alan, 177.

  Ataulfus, 172-175, 208.

  Athanaric (Judge of the Visigoths), 79, 86, 111, 112.

  Attalus, 162-164, 174.

  Attila, King of the Huns, 180-203.

  Augustine, St., 216.

  Augustus, work of, 14.


  B.

  Bacurius, 131.

  Baltic, the, 183, 184.

  Barbaricum, 76, 79.

  Barritus, the, 94.

  Batvin (Gothic martyr), 79.

  Bauto, the Frank, 110, 128, 142.

  Bleda, King of the Huns, 180.

  Bonifacius, Governor of Africa, 179, 209-214.

  Bora, a fierce wind, 131.

  Botheric, 121.

  Bretons, the, 196.

  Britain, invasion of by Angles and Saxons, 183-184.

  Britain, Roman roads in, 2-4.

  Brutus, 12.

  Burgundians, the, 180, 196.

  Busentus, the, Alaric buried in, 168.


  C.

  Caesar, work of, 13, 14;
    on the Germans, 55.

  Caesarius, 119, 120.

  Camps, 20.

  Carthage, Vandals at, 215, 218-220.

  Cassiodorus, 49.

  Castinus, Magister Militum, 177, 209.

  Cauca (in Spain, the birthplace of Theodosius), 105.

  Celtic nationality, 73.

  Censorship, 9.

  Châlons, battle of, so called, 195.

  China, 183.

  Christian legislation of Constantine, 30, 51 _n._

  Christianity, relation of Diocletian to, 28.

  — relation of Constantine to, 29.

  — relation of Constantine’s successors to, 31.

  Chrysopolis, battle of, 27.

  Chrysostom, St. John, 120.

  Clarissimi, class of, 43.

  Claudian, 144.

  Clovis and the vase of Soissons, 69 _n._

  Coinage, Imperial, of 1st and 3rd centuries contrasted, 19.

  Coloni, condition of, 51-52.

  Comes Privatarum Rerum, 42.

  — Sacrarum Largitionum, 42.

  Consistory, Imperial, 37.

  Constantine the Great, 24, 31, 51 _n._

  — the Usurper, 152, 163, 207.

  Constantinople, foundation of, 26;
    siege of, 101.

  Constantius I, 24-25.

  — husband of Placidia, 176.

  — secretary to Attila, 184, 185.

  Crispus, son of Constantine, 27.

  Crocus, king of the Alamanni, 25.

  Curiales, 52-53.


  D.

  Dahn, F., 60 _n._

  Damasus, Pope, 109.

  Decurio, 52.

  Diocletian, his work of restoration, 21-25;
    his death, 26;
    his relation to Christianity, 28.


  E.

  East, Prefecture of, 23.

  Edeco the Hun, 186.

  Ellebichus, 119, 120.

  Emperor, Roman, appearance of, 34, 35;
    titles of, 36.

  Ernak, son of Attila, 190, 203.

  Eucherius, 155, 158.

  Eudoxia, wife of Arcadius, 142.

  — wife of Valentinian III, 225, 228, 232.

  — daughter of Valentinian III, 225;
    married to Huneric, 232.

  Eugenius, Emperor, 130, 131.

  Eutropius, 142.

  Extortion of Roman Governors, 11, 17.


  F.

  Fiesole, 149.

  Firmus, 106.

  Flaccilla, 126.

  Flavianus, Bishop of Antioch, 118-120.

  Food supply of Roman citizens, 48, 49.

  Franks, 74, 152, 179, 196.

  Frederic (Gothic martyr), 79.

  Freeman, E. A., 65 _n._, 210 _n._

  Frigidus, battle of, 131.

  Fritigern, Visigothic chieftain, 79, 86, 87, 91, 92, 96, 97, 111.


  G.

  Gainas the Goth, 131, 140, 141.

  Gaiseric, King of the Vandals, 192, 209-234.

  Galerius, colleague of Diocletian, 24.

  Galla, wife of Theodosius, 126, 130.

  Galla Placidia (see Placidia).

  Games of the circus, 49.

  Gau (= pagus), 65.

  Gaudentius, father of Aetius, 178.

  — son of Aetius, 226.

  Gauls, prefecture of the, 22, 23.

  Gelimer, King of the Vandals, 221.

  Geougen, the, 183.

  Gepidae, 182, 195, 202.

  Germania of Tacitus, 55.

  German kingship, 67-72.

  — popular assemblies, 70-72.

  Germans, condition of, 54-72.

  Gerontius, 207.

  Godigisclus, King of the Vandals, 206.

  ‘Gothic Architecture,’ 75;
    Gothic Christianity, 78;
    Gothic language, 76.

  Goths, 75. See Visigoths, Ostrogoths.

  Gratian, 91, 95, 105, 110, 111, 123-125.

  Greuthungi (= Ostrogoths?), 86 _n._

  Gunderic, King of the Vandals, 208, 209.

  Gunthamund, King of the Vandals, 221.


  H.

  Hadrianople, battle of (323), 27.

  — — (378), 96, 100.

  Helena, mother of Constantine, 24.

  Heraclian, 163, 167.

  Heraclius the Eunuch, 226, 228.

  Hermanric, King of the Ostrogoths, 76, 85.

  Heruli, 182, 195, 202.

  Hilderic, King of the Vandals, 221.

  Hippo, siege of, 214, 216.

  Hispalis (_Seville_) taken by Vandals, 209.

  Honoria, 185, 192.

  Honorius, 134, 146, 152-157, 161-164, 166, 176.

  Huneric, 217.

  Huns, 180, 193;
    description of, by Jordanes, 81, 83;
    ethnological character of, 84;
    enter Europe (374), 85.


  I.

  Ildico, wife of Attila, 202.

  Illustres, class of, 37.

  Illyricum, Prefecture of, 23.

  Ingenuus, 174.

  Italy, Prefecture of, 23.


  J.

  Jerome, St., 45, 47, 174.

  Joannes, Emperor, 177.

  Jordanes (Gothic historian, wrote cir. 550), 81-83.

  Jovian, 90.

  Jovius, Praetorian prefect, 161-162.

  ‘Judges’ of the Visigoths, 76.

  Julian ‘the Apostate,’ 90.

  Julius, master of the soldiery, 104.

  Justina, 91, 126, 128.

  Jutes, the, 183.


  K.

  Kingship and national unity, 67.


  L.

  Lampadius, 153.

  Lancearii, 98.

  Land—settlement of the Germans, 60-62.

  Latifundia, 50, 51.

  Leo I, Pope, 200, 230.

  Leo, Emperor, 232.

  Libanius, 120.

  Licinius, his struggle with Constantine, 27.

  Lupicinus, Count of Thrace, 88-93.

  Lupus, St., Bishop of Troyes, 195, 198.


  M.

  Magister Militiae, 39-40.

  Magister Officiorum, 42.

  Marcian, Emperor, 191.

  Marcianople (_Shumla_), 92-93.

  Marcomanni, 74.

  Maria, wife of Honorius, 154.

  Mattiarii, 98.

  Maxentius, Emperor, 26.

  Maximian, Emperor, 24, 26.

  Maximin Daza, Emperor, 24.

  — ambassador to Attila, 186.

  Maximus (a wealthy citizen of Rome), 47.

  Maximus, Duke of Moesia, 88-93.

  — Magnus Clemens, usurper, 123, 125, 126.

  Maximus, Emperor, 207, 228, 229.

  _Milan_ (Mediolanum), 23.

  Money, purchasing power of, 46 _n._


  N.

  Nicaea, Council of, 29-30.

  Nicomedia in Bithynia, 24-25.

  Nicopolis, city of, owned by Paula, 47.

  Notitia Utriusque Imperii, 38, 39, 40 _n._, 41, 42, 44.


  O.

  Oath taken by soldiers to Emperor, 36.

  Offices, sale of, under the Empire, 43.

  Official hierarchy of the Empire, 37-44.

  Olybrius, ‘Shadow-Emperor,’ 232.

  Olympius, 155-157, 159.

  Onegesius the Hun, 187, 188.

  Optila, henchman of Aetius, 227.

  Orleans, siege of, 194.

  Orosius, 172.

  Ostrogoths, 75, 76, 99, 182, 195, 202.


  P.

  Pagus, German, 65-66.

  Paris, 194.

  Paula, piety and wealth of, 47.

  Persian Empire, relation of, to Roman, 6-7.

  Placidia, daughter of Theodosius, 130, 171, 174-180, 184, 191.

  Placidia, daughter of Valentinian III, 225, 228, 232.

  Pliny, 50.

  Pollentia, battle of, 146.

  Possidius, Bishop of Calama, 216.

  Praefectus Annonae, 49.

  — Praetorio, office of, 38, 39.

  Praepositus Sacri Cubiculi, 41.

  Prefectures, the four great, 22-3.

  Priscus, ambassador to Attila, 186, 189.

  Probus, wealth of, 46.

  Procopius, 166, 210.

  Proculus, 136.

  Proletariate, 46 _n._

  Pulcheria, sister of Theodosius II, 191, 228.


  Q.

  Quaestor, 42.


  R.

  Radagaisus, 145, 146, 148, 149.

  Ravenna, Honorius at, 146.

  Richomer, Count of the Domestics, 97.

  Ricimer, 232.

  Roman Empire, boundaries of, 1-7.

  Romanus, 106.

  Rome, sieges of, 159;
    entered by Alaric, 164;
    plunder of, by the Vandals, 231.

  Rufinus, Praetorian Prefect, 135-142.


  S.

  Salarian Gate, Alaric enters Rome through, 164.

  Sallust, palace of, burned, 165.

  Sangiban, King of the Alani, 196.

  Saphrax, Ostrogothic chief, 96, 97.

  Sarmatians, 73, 74.

  Sarus the Goth, 149, 157, 164.

  Saulus the Alan, 131, 147.

  Saxons, the, 183, 196.

  Sebastian, General, 96, 100.

  — son-in-law of Bonifacius, 224.

  Seebohm, F., 62, 68 _n._

  Senate of Rome, 7-9;
    behaviour of Emperors to, 15-16.

  Serena, 136, 153, 160.

  Severus, 24.

  Siege artillery, Roman, 102.

  Silentiarii, 33.

  Silvanus the Goldsmith, 185.

  Singeric, 175.

  Sirmium, 23-95.

  — vases of, 184, 185, 192.

  Slaves, condition of, 50, 51.

  Slavonic nationality, 73.

  _Spalato_ (near Salona), 27 _n._

  Spectabiles, class of, 38.

  Stilicho, 135-158.

  Stubbs, Bishop, 65 _n._

  Suevi, 182, 206.

  Symmachus, wealth of, 46.


  T.

  Tacitus, Germania of, 55, 60-62, 68, 71.

  Tatianus, 136.

  Theodoric, King of the Visigoths, 192-3.

  Theodosius the Elder, 106.

  — the Great, 105, 106-133, 139.

  — II, son of Arcadius, 155, 177, 186, 191.

  — son of Ataulfus and Placidia, 175.

  Thermantia, wife of Honorius, 154, 158.

  Thessalonica, 121, 126.

  Thincsus, epithet of German Mars, 70 _n._

  Thing, meeting of the Folk, 70.

  Thiudans (= king in Gothic), 72.

  Thorismund the Visigoth, 196, 197.

  Thrasamund, King of the Vandals, 221.

  Thraustila, henchman of Aetius, 227.

  Ticinum (_Pavia_), 156.

  Trajan, General-in-Chief, 100.

  Tribunician power, 10.

  _Trier_ (Augusta Trevirorum), 23.


  U.

  Uldin the Hun, 149.

  Ulfilas, Apostle of the Goths, 77, 78, 110.


  V.

  Valens, Emperor, 87-98.

  Valentinian I, 90, 91.

  — II, 91, 125-129.

  — III, 177, 184, 191, 200, 225-7.

  Valerian, Count of Imperial Stables, 100.

  Vandals, the, 204-232.

  Venice, foundation of, 199.

  Victor, son of usurper Maximus, 128.

  Victor Vitensis, 224.

  Village settlements of the Germans, 57, 58.

  Visigoths, 75, 87-99, 179.

  Völker-wanderung, the, 215.


  W.

  Waitz, G., 60 _n._

  Walamir, King of the Ostrogoths, 196.

  Walia, King of the Visigoths, 176.

  Wealthy Romans, fortunes of, 46.


  Y.

  _York_ (Eboracum), 25-26.


  Z.

  Zercon, the Moor, 190.

  Zosimus, 133.


THE END.




[Illustration: THE ROMAN EMPIRE in the time of Valentinian I. A.D.
364-375]

[Illustration: EUROPE IN THE YEAR 451]




BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


_Italy and her Invaders._

ILLUSTRATED WITH PLATES AND MAPS.

Vols. I-IV, A.D. 376-553.

8_vo._ 3_l._ 8_s._



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DYNASTY OF THEODOSIUS, OR, EIGHTY YEARS' STRUGGLE WITH THE BARBARIANS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


