The Project Gutenberg eBook of Medical ethics
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Medical ethics
        or, a code of institutes and precepts, adapted to the professional conduct of physicians and surgeons

Author: Thomas Percival


        
Release date: June 6, 2026 [eBook #78821]

Language: English

Original publication: Oxford: John Henry Parker, 1849

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78821

Credits: Jamie Brydone-Jack and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDICAL ETHICS ***




PERCIVAL’S MEDICAL ETHICS.

_The Profits of this little work, if any, will be given to some Medical
Charity._

                                  OXFORD:
                         PRINTED BY I. SHRIMPTON.




                              MEDICAL ETHICS;

                               OR, A CODE OF
                         INSTITUTES AND PRECEPTS,
                              ADAPTED TO THE
                           PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
                                    OF
                         PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS.

                                BY THE LATE
                       THOMAS PERCIVAL, M.D., F.R.S.

                             _THIRD EDITION._

                                  OXFORD:
                            JOHN HENRY PARKER.
               LONDON: JOHN CHURCHILL, PRINCES STREET, SOHO.

                               M DCCC XLIX.




                                    TO
                          STANLEY PERCIVAL, ESQ.,
                         OF BRIDGEFOOT, MIDDLESEX,
                            ONLY SURVIVING SON
                             OF DR. PERCIVAL,
                             THIS NEW EDITION
                         OF HIS FATHER’S LAST AND
                            MOST VALUABLE WORK
                         IS RESPECTFULLY OFFERED.




EDITOR’S PREFACE.


As the late Dr. Percival’s Code of Medical Ethics is commonly quoted as a
work of authority, not only in this country, but also in America[1], and
as the original edition[2] has now become somewhat scarce, it was thought
that it might be usefully republished.

The present edition is reprinted from that published by Dr. Percival
himself, (8vo. Manchester, 1803,) corrected occasionally by his
unfinished and unpublished edition[3], and also by the posthumous reprint
contained in vol. ii. of his collected “Works.” (4 vols. 8vo. Bath,
1807.) The references have been verified, and in several instances the
quotations have been corrected, but no other alteration has been made in
the _text_ of the work; as, even when the statements contained in it
were positively erroneous, the Editor preferred correcting them (where
necessary,) in a note[4]. Of the Notes and Illustrations added by Dr.
Percival several have been omitted, as being no longer wanted, as also
has the “Discourse on Hospital Duties” by his son.

By republishing Dr. Percival’s Code the Editor does not mean to imply
his agreement with all the opinions it contains, or his entire approval
either of the plan or the execution of the work. The want of a detailed
and scientific treatise on the subject of Medical Ethics, suited to
the present state of the Profession in Great Britain, (as M. Simon’s
admirable “Déontologie Médicale” is to France,) is beginning to be
universally felt. It has indeed long occupied the Editor’s thoughts,
and (as he has already ventured to intimate to the public[5],) he still
hopes, if life and leisure be allowed him, and if no abler writer step
forward to anticipate his design, to endeavour at some future time to
supply it.

_Sept. 11, 1849._


FOOTNOTES:

[1] In the Note prefixed by Dr. Hays to the “Code of Ethics of the
American Medical Association,” he writes as follows:—“On examining
a great number of Codes of Ethics adopted by different societies in
the United States, it was found that they were all based on that by
Dr. Percival, and that the phrases of this writer were preserved to a
considerable extent in all of them. Believing that language so often
examined and adopted, must possess the greatest of merits for such a
document as the present, clearness and precision, and having no ambition
for the honors of authorship, the Committee which prepared this Code have
followed a similar course, and have carefully preserved the words of
Percival, whenever they convey the precepts it is wished to inculcate.”

[2] A new edition was published in 1827, but the Editor’s notes are of
such a nature as to render the book absolutely mischievous.

[3] Of this rare volume the only copy that the Editor has seen or heard
of is in the library of the Manchester Royal Infirmary, and was given by
Dr. Percival himself. In the beginning there is the following Note in
his own hand-writing:—“The completion of the Medical Jurisprudence has
been long suspended; and it is uncertain when the undertaking will be
resumed. A title page; an introduction; a fifth and sixth section; and an
appendix, containing Notes and Illustrations, are wanting to finish this
little work.

_Manchester, March 17, 1794._”

It ends abruptly on p. 96, which terminates chap. iv. The text for the
most part agrees with that which was afterwards published, except that
this latter contains about twenty paragraphs that are not to be found
in the original sketch, and that great part of what forms Note XIV.
in the present edition is there found in the _text_. At the end of
the treatise there is the following Note, also in Dr. Percival’s own
hand-writing:—“Two sections wanting. Sect. V. On the Powers, Privileges,
Honours, and Emoluments of the Faculty. Sect. VI. On the Moral,
Religious, and Political Character of Physicians.”

[4] All the Editor’s additions are placed within brackets.

[5] In the Advertisement to Gisborne “On the Duties of Physicians.”




Nulla enim vitae pars, neque publicis neque privatis, neque forensibus
neque domesticis in rebus, neque si tecum agas quid, neque si cum altero
contrahas, vacare officio potest; in eoque colendo sita vitae est
honestas omnis, et in negligendo turpitudo.—(Cicero, _De Off._ i. 2.)




CONTENTS.


                                                                      Page

  Sketch of the Life of Dr. Percival                                    13

  Author’s Dedication                                                   17

  Author’s Letter to E. C. Percival                                     19

                            AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

  Origin of the work.—Suspension of it.—Farther progress of
    it.—Addition of supplementary Notes and Illustrations               21

                                CHAPTER I.

         _Of Professional Conduct relative to Hospitals, or other
                           Medical Charities._

  § 1. Duties of hospital Physicians and Surgeons.—Tenderness.—
    Steadiness.—Condescension.—Authority                                27

  § 2. Choice of their attendant Physician or Surgeon, how far
    allowable to hospital patients                                      ib.

  § 3. Feelings and emotions of patients, under critical
    circumstances, to be duly regarded                                  28

  § 4. No discussion concerning the nature of their case to be
    entered into before them                                            ib.

  § 5. Delicacy in many cases particularly required; and secrecy
    sometimes to be strictly observed                                   29

  § 6. Moral and religious influence of sickness to be cherished
    and promoted                                                        29

  § 7. Propriety of suggesting to patients, under certain
    circumstances, the importance of making their last will and
    testament                                                           30

  § 8. Parsimony in prescribing wine and drugs of high price
    reprobated                                                          ib.

  § 9. Hospital affairs and occurrences not to be incautiously
    revealed                                                            31

  § 10. Professional charges to be made only before a meeting of the
    Faculty                                                             ib.

  § 11. Proper discrimination between the Medical and Chirurgical
    cases to be strictly adhered to                                     32

  § 12. What circumstances authorize new remedies and new methods of
    Chirurgical treatment                                               ib.

  § 13. Unreserved intercourse should subsist between the gentlemen
    of the Faculty; and an account of every case or operation which
    is rare, curious, or instructive, should be regularly drawn up
    and preserved                                                       ib.

  § 14. Scheme for hospital registers                                   33

  § 15. Advantages arising from the scheme                              34

  § 16. Close and crowded wards reprobated                              35

  § 17. Establishment of a committee of the gentlemen of the
    Faculty considered                                                  36

  § 18. Importance of frequent consultations, and the mutual
    assistance of the Physicians and Surgeons                           ib.

  § 19-22. Rules to be observed in consultations                        ib.

  § 23. Rules to be observed respecting operations                      38

  § 24. Hospital consultations ought not to be held on Sundays,
    except in cases of urgent necessity                                 39

  § 25. Stated days for operations often inconvenient and improper      39

  § 26. Dispensaries                                                    ib.

  § 27. Asylums for female patients labouring under syphilis.—Rules
    to be observed in Lock Hospitals                                    41

  § 28. Asylums for insanity                                            43

  § 29. Modes of acquiring knowledge in the treatment of insanity
    recommended                                                         44

  § 30. Treatment of lunatics—tenderness—indulgence                     45

  § 31. Boldness of practice sometimes required in cases of
    mania.—Hospitals for small-pox—inoculation, &c. &c., require
    no professional duties not already enumerated                       ib.

                               CHAPTER II.

        _Of Professional Conduct in Private or General Practice._

  § 1. Moral rules of conduct, the same with those to be observed
    towards hospital patients                                           47

  § 2. The strictest temperance required                                ib.

  § 3. Proper conduct to be observed respecting prognostications, and
    the disclosure of circumstances to the friends of the patients      48

  § 4. Proper conduct respecting interference in cases under the
    charge of another                                                   49

  § 5. Conduct to be observed towards a Physician formerly employed
    by the patient, but not now consulted                               50

  § 6. Distinction between the provinces of Physic and Surgery to be
    steadily maintained                                                 ib.

  § 7. Consultations to be promoted in difficult or protracted cases    51

  § 8. Special consultation.—Conduct of the Physician called in         52

  § 9. Theoretical discussions to be avoided in consultations           53

  § 10. Rules for consultations the same with those prescribed to
    the Faculty attending hospitals.—Seniority, how determined          ib.

  § 11. Education of Medical men—what influence it ought to have in
    the consideration of their brethren                                 ib.

  § 12. Punctuality in visits of consultation—further rules to be
    observed                                                            54

  § 13. Visits to the sick not to be unseasonably repeated              55

  § 14. Rules to be observed with regard to fees, when a Physician
    officiates in the absence, or at the request, of another            ib.

  § 15. Importance of adopting some general rule respecting
    pecuniary acknowledgements                                          56

  § 16. Medical men and their families, when to be attended
    gratuitously                                                        57

  § 17. Peculiar delicacy and attention often required in attendance
    upon them                                                           58

  § 18. Attendance on clergymen in narrow circumstances                 ib.

  § 19. Consultation by letter                                          59

  § 20. Rules to be observed in furnishing certificates                 ib.

  § 21. Use of quack medicines to be discouraged                        60

  § 22. The dispensing of nostrums reprobated                           61

  § 23. Duty incumbent on individuals to promote the general
    reputation of the Faculty collectively                              ib.

  § 24. Rule to be observed in professional controversy and contention  62

  § 25. Giving advice gratis                                            ib.

  § 26. Rule to be observed in visiting the patient of another
    Physician                                                           63

  § 27. Another case of the same                                        ib.

  § 28. Review of the treatment and progress of interesting cases
    recommended                                                         ib.

  § 29. Moral and religious advice to patients                          64

  § 30. Observance of the Sabbath by Medical gentlemen considered       65

  § 31. Co-operation of young and aged practitioners                    ib.

  § 32. Period of senescence in Physicians considered                   66

                               CHAPTER III.

             _Of the Conduct of Physicians to Apothecaries._

  § 1. Connection between the Apothecary and Physician                  69

  § 2. The Apothecary often precursor to the Physician, and commonly
    acquainted with the diseases of the family                          ib.

  § 3. Rule to be observed in the intercourse and co-operation of
    the Physician and Apothecary                                        71

  § 4. Duty and responsibility of the Physician                         ib.

  § 5. Particular directions to be observed in visiting country
    patients with the Apothecary                                        72

  § 6. Profits of Apothecaries                                          73

  § 7. Physicians visiting the patients of Apothecaries in their
    absence, not approved of                                            74

  § 8. Duty of Apothecaries in recommending Physicians to families      75

  § 9. Establishment of funds for the benefit of the widows and
    children of Apothecaries                                            76

                               CHAPTER IV.

         _Of Professional Duties in certain Cases which require a
                            Knowledge of Law._

  § 1. Medical gentlemen exempt from serving on inquests, juries,
    &c.; but frequently called upon to exercise duties which require
    juridical knowledge                                                 78

  § 2. Duty of Physicians in cases of last will and testament—knowledge
    of law required                                                     79

  § 3. Commissions of lunacy—appointment of a curator                   83

  § 4. Treatment of lunatics as authorized by law                       85

  § 5. Asylums for lunatics subject to strict regulations of law        ib.

  § 6. Opinions given in cases of sudden death                          87

  § 7. Justifiable homicide                                             88

  § 8. Excusable homicide                                               89

  § 9. Suicide                                                          92

  § 10. Manslaughter—Murder                                             93

  § 11. Murder of bastard children                                      96

  § 12. Duelling                                                       102

  § 13. Duty of Surgeons with respect to attending a duellist to
    the field of combat                                                106

  § 14. Private and personal duty of Physicians with respect to
    duel—true honour considered                                        108

  § 15. Homicide by poison—cases adduced                               109

  § 16. Law in cases of rape                                           113

  § 17. Nuisances defined and considered                               117

  § 18. Duty of Medical gentlemen when summoned to attend coroners,
    magistrates, and judges                                            120

  § 19. Importance to gentlemen of the Faculty of settling their
    opinions concerning the right of magistrates to inflict capital
    punishment.—The limits prescribed to the exercise of the right;
    and the duty of giving full efficiency to law                      122

  § 20. Cautions relative to professional testimony in cases of
    peculiar malignity                                                 125

                         NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

  Note

  I. Caution or temerity in practice                                   129

  II. Temperance of Physicians                                         130

  III. A Physician should be the minister of hope and comfort to
    the sick.—Enquiry, how far it is justifiable to violate truth
    for the supposed benefit of the patient                            132

  IV. The practice of a prior Physician should be treated with
    candour, and justified, so far as truth and probity will permit    141

  V. Theoretical discussions should be generally avoided               142

  VI. Regular academical education                                      ib.

  VII. Pecuniary acknowledgements                                      146

  VIII. Public worship; scepticism and infidelity                      150

  IX. Union in consultation of senior and junior Physicians            166

  X. [On Wills]                                                        168

  XI. Partial insanity, with general intelligence—Lucid interval       169

  XII. [On the new Lunatic Act]                                        175

  XIII. [Legal penalties on duelling]                                  181

  XIV. Duelling.—Letter from Dr. Franklin                               ib.

  XV. Punishment of the crime of rape                                  192

  XVI. [Medical evidence at inquests]                                  194




SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF DR. PERCIVAL[6].


Thomas Percival was born at Warrington in Lancashire, Sept. 29, 1740.
When only three years old, he had the misfortune to lose both his
parents; and the care of his early education devolved upon his eldest
sister. When of proper age, he was placed at a private academy in the
neighbourhood of his native town; to the free grammar-school of which he
was subsequently removed.

In 1757 his name was enrolled as the first student at the Warrington
academy, then just instituted under the superintendence of Dr. Aikin.
After having acquired a high reputation for diligence in classical and
theological studies, he proceeded in 1761 to Edinburgh, where he applied
himself with great assiduity to medical pursuits. He would, it appears,
have gone either to Oxford or Cambridge, but for his scruples about
subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles. Whilst in Edinburgh he became
acquainted with Mr. Hume and Dr. Robertson; and during a visit to London
contracted a close intimacy with Lord Willoughby de Parham, who made him
his constant companion, and became his warmest friend and patron. He was
indebted to this nobleman for an early introduction to the most eminent
literary characters of the day; and through his recommendation became a
Fellow of the Royal Society in 1765.

In the same year he took his degree of M.D. at Leyden, and afterwards
visited Paris and Hamburgh. He then returned to Warrington; at which
place, after a residence of a few months, he married the daughter of
Nathaniel Bassnett Esq. In 1767 he settled at Manchester, where he passed
the remainder of his life.

Dr. Percival held a distinguished rank both as a literary character,
and a physician. In the latter capacity he displayed quick penetration,
discriminating judgement, patient attention, and above all, says
Abp. Magee, a deep sense of responsibility. As an author he obtained
considerable reputation in the philosophical and religious world,
particularly by his “Essays, Medical and Experimental,” and his last
work entitled, “Medical Ethics,” in which, it is said, while delineating
the requisites and qualifications of the medical practitioner, he has
unconsciously displayed the most exact portraiture of himself. His
other more important productions include “A Father’s Instructions;”
“Moral and Literary Dissertations,” (which have rarely been surpassed
by any didactic composition of a similar extent, for genuine feeling,
refined taste, purity of style or aptness of illustration;) and several
papers published in the Transactions of the Manchester Literary and
Philosophical Society, of which he was an original member, and continued
the president from its first foundation to the end of his life. He was
the first who attempted to establish public lectures on mathematics,
commerce, and the fine arts, in that town. In addition to his other
honours he was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and a member
of several foreign Societies. His correspondence was extensive, and
embraced a variety of subjects: among his epistolary friends, were
Archdeacon Paley, Dr. Priestley, Dr. Franklin, Dr. Beattie, and Hannah
More. In one of his letters to the first of these celebrated characters,
he avows himself a dissenter; but he rarely alludes to the fact
elsewhere, and he is known to have entertained a sincere respect for the
Church of England, of which his eldest son was a minister. He died at
Manchester Aug. 30, 1804, in the sixty-fourth year of his age. A Latin
epitaph by the Rev. Dr. Parr is inscribed on his tomb in the church at
Warrington; and over the president’s chair, in the hall of the Manchester
Philosophical Society, a mural tablet has been erected to his memory.
His works were collected and published in 4 vols. 8vo., 1807, with a
biographical memoir by his son Dr. Edward Percival, of Bath.


FOOTNOTES:

[6] Taken, with a few alterations, from “the Georgian Era,” vol. ii.




                                    TO
                         SIR GEORGE BAKER, BART.,
                       PHYSICIAN TO THEIR MAJESTIES,
                       FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY,
                                    AND
            LATE PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, &c. &c.
                               THIS CODE OF
                           PROFESSIONAL ETHICS,
                               WHICH HE HAS
                        HONOURED WITH HIS SANCTION,
                    AND IMPROVED BY HIS COMMUNICATIONS,
                      IS GRATEFULLY AND RESPECTFULLY
                                INSCRIBED,
                                  BY HIS
                     OBLIGED AND AFFECTIONATE FRIEND,
                                THE AUTHOR.
                                  [1803.]




Quicquid dignum sapiente bonoque est.

(Horace, _Ep._ i. 4. 5.)




TO E. C. PERCIVAL[7].


Permit me, my dear Son, to offer to your acceptance this little manual
of MEDICAL ETHICS. In the composition of it, my thoughts were directed
towards your late excellent brother[7], with the tenderest impulse of
paternal love; and not a single moral rule was framed without a secret
view to his designation, and an anxious wish that it might influence his
future conduct.

To you, who possess in no inferior degree my esteem and attachment,
who are prosecuting the same studies, and with the same object, my
solicitudes are naturally transferred: and I am persuaded, these united
considerations will powerfully and permanently operate upon your
ingenuous mind.

It is the characteristic of a wise man to act on determinate principles;
and of a good man to be assured that they are conformable to rectitude
and virtue. The relations in which a Physician stands to his patients,
to his brethren, and to the public, are complicated and multifarious;
involving much knowledge of human nature, and extensive moral duties. The
study of professional Ethics, therefore, cannot fail to invigorate and
enlarge your understanding; whilst the observance of the duties which
they enjoin, will soften your manners, expand your affections, and form
you to that propriety and dignity of conduct, which are essential to the
character of a gentleman. The academical advantages you have enjoyed at
Cambridge, and those you now possess in Edinburgh, will qualify you,
I trust, for an ample and honourable sphere of action. And I devoutly
pray, that the blessing of GOD may attend all your pursuits, rendering
them at once subservient to your own felicity, and the good of your
fellow-creatures.

Sensible that I begin to experience the pressure of advancing years, I
regard the present publication as the conclusion, in this way, of my
professional labours[8]. I may, therefore, without impropriety, claim the
privilege of consecrating them to you, as a paternal legacy. And I feel
cordial satisfaction in the occasion of thus testifying the esteem and
tenderness, with which, whilst life subsists, I shall remain,

                         Your affectionate friend,

                                                          THOMAS PERCIVAL.

_Manchester, Febr. 20, 1803._


FOOTNOTES:

[7] [See below, p. 22.]

[8] [This anticipation was correct: Dr. Percival died in the following
year, Aug. 30, in the sixty-fourth year of his age.]




AUTHOR’S PREFACE.


The first chapter of the following work was composed in the spring of
1792, at the request of the Physicians and Surgeons of the Manchester
Infirmary: and the substance of it constitutes the code of laws, by
which the practice of that comprehensive institution is now governed.
The Author was afterwards induced, by an earnest desire to promote the
honour and advancement of his Profession, to enlarge the plan of his
undertaking, and to frame a general system of Medical Ethics; that the
official conduct and mutual intercourse of the Faculty might be regulated
by precise and acknowledged principles of urbanity and rectitude. Printed
copies of the scheme were therefore distributed amongst his numerous
correspondents, by most of whom it was warmly encouraged, and by many of
them was honoured with valuable suggestions for its improvement.

Whilst the Author was thus extending his views, and carrying on his
work with ardour, he lost the strongest incentive to its prosecution,
by the death of a beloved son[9], who had nearly completed the course
of his academical education, and whose talents, acquirements, and
virtues, promised to render him an ornament to the healing art. This
melancholy event was followed, not many years afterwards, by a second
family loss equally afflictive[10]; and the design has ever since been
wholly suspended. The Author now resumes it, animated by the hope that
it may prove beneficial to another son[11], who has lately exchanged the
pursuits of general science at Cambridge, for the study of Medicine at
Edinburgh. He feels at the same time impressed with the conviction that
the languor of sorrow becomes culpable, when it obstructs the offices of
an active vocation. “I hold every man,” says Lord Bacon[12], “a debtor
to his profession; from the which as men of course do seek to receive
countenance and profit, so ought they of duty to endeavour themselves, by
way of amends, to be a help and ornament thereunto. This is performed
in some degree by the honest and liberal practice of a profession,
when men shall carry a respect not to descend into any course that is
corrupt and unworthy thereof, and preserve themselves free from the
abuses wherewith the same profession is noted to be infected: but much
more is this performed if a man be able to visit and strengthen the
roots and foundation of the science itself; thereby not only gracing
it in reputation and dignity, but also amplifying it in profession and
substance.”

It was the Author’s original intention to have treated of the powers,
privileges, honours, and emoluments of the Faculty. But he now conceives
that this would lead him into a field of investigation too wide and
digressive; and therefore chooses to confine himself to what more
strictly belongs to Medical Ethics.

To these institutes he has annexed an Anniversary Discourse, delivered
by the late Rev. Thomas Bassnett Percival, LL.B., before the President
and Governors of the Infirmary at Liverpool[13]. As it is an address to
the gentlemen of the Faculty, the officers, the clergy, and the trustees
of the charity, on their respective hospital duties, by one competent to
the subject from his early studies, it cannot but be deemed sufficiently
appropriate to the present work, exclusively of a father’s claim to the
privilege of its insertion.

The aphoristic form of this code of Medical Ethics, though adapted
to such an undertaking, forbids in a great measure all digression,
and even precludes the discussion of many interesting points nearly
connected with the subject. Supplementary Notes and Illustrations,
therefore, are necessary to the completion of the Author’s plan: and
he trusts the candid reader will grant him the liberty of thus stating
his opinions more at large; of rectifying misconceptions, to which the
brevity essential to the work may give rise; and of correcting whatever
subsequent reflection, or the judicious observations of his friends, may
discover to be erroneous.

A considerable portion of these sheets was communicated to the Rev.
Thomas Gisborne, M.A.[14], whilst engaged in the composition of his
“Enquiry into the Duties of Men,” a work that reflects the highest
honour on the abilities and philanthropy of the author, and which may
be justly regarded as the most complete system extant of practical
ethics. The chapter concerning Physicians[15] contains a reference to
these institutes, expressed in the most gratifying terms of friendship;
and it treats so largely of the duties of the Faculty, as to seem,
at first view, to supersede the use of the present manual. But the
two publications differ not only in their plan, but in many of their
leading objects; and it may be hoped they will rather illustrate than
interfere with each other. The same remarks may be applied to the
excellent “Lectures” of Dr. Gregory[16]. Even the “Statuta Moralia” of
the College of Physicians[17], whatever merit or authority they possess,
are not sufficiently comprehensive for the existing sphere of Medical and
Chirurgical duty; and by the few regulations which they establish, they
tacitly sanction the recommendation of a fuller and more adequate code of
professional offices.

Copies of the former unfinished impression of this work have been
transmitted to the libraries of several infirmaries in different parts of
the kingdom; and the Author has reason to hope that they have contributed
to excite attention to the subject of hospital police. Amongst other
pleasing proofs of this truth, he refers with peculiar satisfaction to
the late publications of his friends, Sir G. O. Paul, Bart., and Dr.
Clark[18], of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

This work was originally entitled “Medical Jurisprudence;” but, some
friends having objected to the term _Jurisprudence_, it has been
changed to _Ethics_. According to the definition of Justinian, however,
Jurisprudence may be understood to include moral injunctions as well as
positive ordinances:—“Juris praecepta sunt haec; honeste vivere, alterum
non laedere, suum cuique tribuere.” (_Instit._ i. 1. § 3.)

_Manchester, Febr. 15, 1803._


FOOTNOTES:

[9] [James Percival, who died Febr. 25, 1793, in the twenty-fourth
year of his age, of a malignant fever, which he had contracted while
prosecuting his medical studies at Edinburgh. See _Memoirs of Dr.
Percival_, prefixed to his “Works,” p. clxxix.]

[10] [The death of his eldest son the Rev. Thomas Bassnett Percival, in
the thirty-second year of his age, May 27, 1798. See _Memoirs &c._ p.
ccii.]

[11] [Edward Cropper Percival, the editor of his father’s collected
Works, and author of “Practical Observations on Typhous Fever,” 8vo.
1819; who settled first at Dublin, and afterwards at Bath, where he died,
1819, at the age of 36.]

[12] In the preface to his _Elements of the Common Laws of England_.
(_Works_, vol. iv. p. 9.)

[13] [This Sermon is omitted in the present edition.]

[14] [The author of numerous religious works; born Oct. 31, 1758, died
March 24, 1846. See _Gent. Mag._ for June 1846.]

[15] [The twelfth chapter, which has been extracted, and reprinted in a
separate form, 1847, Oxford, 16mo.]

[16] [Dr. John Gregory’s well-known “Lectures on the Duties and
Qualifications of a Physician.”]

[17] [“Statuta Moralia Collegii Regalis Medicorum Londinensium,” 1722,
8vo. pp. 16.]

[18] [Author of “Observations on Fevers,” &c. 1780, 8vo., and other
works.]




MEDICAL ETHICS;

_&c. &c._




CHAPTER I.

_Of Professional Conduct, relative to Hospitals, or other Medical
Charities._


§ 1. Hospital Physicians and Surgeons should minister to the sick with
due impressions of the importance of their office; reflecting that the
ease, the health, and the lives of those committed to their charge
depend on their skill, attention, and fidelity. They should study,
also, in their deportment, so to unite tenderness with steadiness, and
condescension with authority, as to inspire the minds of their patients
with gratitude, respect, and confidence.

§ 2. The choice of a Physician or Surgeon cannot be allowed to hospital
patients, consistently with the regular and established succession of
medical attendance. Yet personal confidence is not less important to
the comfort and relief of the sick poor, than of the rich under similar
circumstances; and it would be equally just and humane to enquire
into and to indulge their partialities, by occasionally calling into
consultation the favourite practitioner. The rectitude and wisdom of
this conduct will be still more apparent, when it is recollected, that
patients in hospitals not unfrequently request their discharge on a
deceitful plea of having received relief, and afterwards procure another
recommendation, that they may be admitted under the Physician or Surgeon
of their choice. Such practices involve in them a degree of falsehood,
produce unnecessary trouble, and may be the occasion of irreparable loss
of time in the treatment of diseases.

§ 3. The feelings and emotions of the patients, under critical
circumstances, require to be known and to be attended to, no less than
the symptoms of their diseases: thus, extreme timidity with respect to
venesection contra-indicates its use in certain cases and constitutions.
Even the prejudices of the sick are not to be contemned, or opposed with
harshness; for, though silenced by authority, they will operate secretly
and forcibly on the mind, creating fear, anxiety, and watchfulness.

§ 4. As misapprehension may magnify real evils, or create imaginary
ones, no discussion concerning the nature of the case should be entered
into before the patients, either with the House-Surgeon, the pupils of
the hospital, or any medical visitor.

§ 5. In the large wards of an infirmary the patients should be
interrogated concerning their complaints in a tone of voice which cannot
be overheard. Secrecy, also, when required by peculiar circumstances,
should be strictly observed. And females should always be treated with
the most scrupulous delicacy. To neglect or to sport with their feelings
is cruelty; and every wound thus inflicted tends to produce a callousness
of mind, a contempt of decorum, and an insensibility to modesty and
virtue. Let these considerations be forcibly and repeatedly urged on the
hospital pupils.

§ 6. The moral and religious influence of sickness is so favourable to
the best interests of men and of society, that it is justly regarded
as an important object in the establishment of every hospital. The
institutions for promoting it should therefore be encouraged by the
Physicians and Surgeons, whenever seasonable opportunities occur; and,
by pointing out these to the officiating clergyman, the sacred offices
will be performed with propriety, discrimination, and greater certainty
of success. The character of a Physician is usually remote either from
superstition or enthusiasm; and the aid, which he is now exhorted to
give, will tend to their exclusion from the sick wards of the hospital,
where their effects have often been known to be not only baneful, but
even fatal.

§ 7. It is one of the circumstances which softens the lot of the poor,
that they are exempt from the solicitudes attendant on the disposal of
property. Yet there are exceptions to this observation; and it may be
necessary that an hospital patient, on the bed of sickness and death,
should be reminded by some friendly monitor of the importance of a last
will and testament to his wife, children, or relatives, who otherwise
might be deprived of his effects, of his expected prize-money, or of
some future residuary legacy. This kind office will be best performed
by the House-Surgeon, whose frequent attendance on the sick diminishes
their reserve, and entitles him to their familiar confidence. And he will
doubtless regard the performance of it as a duty; for whatever is right
to be done, and cannot by another be so well done, has the full force of
moral and personal obligation.

§ 8. The Physicians and Surgeons should not suffer themselves to be
restrained by parsimonious considerations from prescribing wine, and
drugs even of high price, when required in diseases of extraordinary
malignity and danger. The efficacy of every medicine is proportionate
to its purity and goodness; and on the degree of these properties,
_caeteris paribus_, both the cure of the sick and the speediness of
its accomplishment must depend. But, when drugs of inferior quality
are employed, it is requisite to administer them in larger doses, and
to continue the use of them a longer period of time; circumstances
which probably more than counterbalance any savings in their original
price. If the case, however, were far otherwise, no economy of a fatal
tendency ought to be admitted into institutions, founded on principles
of the purest beneficence, and which, in this age and country, when well
conducted, can never want contributions adequate to their liberal support.

§ 9. The Medical gentlemen of every charitable institution are in some
degree responsible for, and the guardians of, the honour of each other.
No Physician or Surgeon, therefore, should reveal occurrences in the
hospital, which may injure the reputation of any one of his colleagues;
except under the restriction contained in the succeeding article.

§ 10. No professional charge should be made by a Physician or Surgeon,
either publicly or privately, against any associate, without previously
laying the complaint before the gentlemen of the Faculty belonging to the
institution, that they may judge concerning the reasonableness of its
grounds, and the measures to be adopted.

§ 11. A proper discrimination being established in all hospitals between
the Medical and Chirurgical cases, it should be faithfully adhered to by
the Physicians and Surgeons on the admission of patients.

§ 12. Whenever cases occur, attended with circumstances not heretofore
observed, or in which the ordinary modes of practice have been attempted
without success, it is for the public good, and in an especial degree
advantageous to the poor, (who, being the most numerous class of society,
are the greatest beneficiaries of the healing art,) that new remedies
and new methods of Chirurgical treatment should be devised. But in the
accomplishment of this salutary purpose the gentlemen of the Faculty
should be scrupulously and conscientiously governed by sound reason,
just analogy, or well authenticated facts. And no such trials should be
instituted without a previous consultation of the Physicians or Surgeons,
according to the nature of the case.

§ 13. To advance professional improvement, a friendly and unreserved
intercourse should subsist between the gentlemen of the Faculty, with
a free communication of whatever is extraordinary or interesting in
the course of their hospital practice. And an account of every case or
operation, which is rare, curious, or instructive, should be drawn up
by the Physician or Surgeon to whose charge it devolves, and entered in
a register kept for the purpose, but open only to the Physicians and
Surgeons of the charity.

§ 14. Hospital registers usually contain only a simple report of
the number of patients admitted and discharged. By adopting a more
comprehensive plan they might be rendered subservient to Medical science
and beneficial to mankind. The following sketch is offered with deference
to the gentlemen of the Faculty. Let the register consist of three
tables: the first specifying the number of patients admitted, cured,
relieved, discharged, or dead; the second, the several diseases of the
patients, with their events; the third, the sexes, ages, and occupations
of the patients. The ages should be reduced into classes; and the tables
adapted to the four divisions of the year. By such an institution, the
increase or decrease of sickness; the attack, progress, and cessation of
epidemics; the comparative healthiness of different situations, climates,
and seasons; the influence of particular trades and manufactures
on health and life; with many other curious circumstances, not more
interesting to Physicians than to the community, would be ascertained
with sufficient precision.

§ 15. By the adoption of the register recommended in the foregoing
article, Physicians and Surgeons would obtain a clearer insight into the
comparative success of their hospital and private practice; and would be
incited to a diligent investigation of the causes of such difference.
In particular diseases it will be found to subsist in a very remarkable
degree: and the discretionary power of the Physician or Surgeon in
the admission of patients, could not be exerted with more justice or
humanity, than in refusing to consign to lingering suffering and almost
certain death a numerous class of patients, inadvertently recommended
as objects of these charitable institutions. “In judging of diseases
with regard to the propriety of their reception into hospitals,” says
an excellent writer, “the following general circumstances are to be
considered:—

“Whether they be capable of speedy relief; because, as it is the
intention of charity to relieve as great a number as possible, a quick
change of objects is to be wished; and also because the inbred disease
of hospitals will almost inevitably creep in some degree upon one who
continues a long time in them, but will rarely attack one whose stay is
short.

“Whether they require in a particular manner the superintendence of
skilful persons, either on account of their acute and dangerous nature,
or any singularity or intricacy attending them, or erroneous opinions
prevailing among the common people concerning their treatment....

“Whether they be contagious, or subject in a peculiar degree to corrupt
the air and generate pestilential diseases....

“Whether a fresh and pure air be peculiarly requisite for their cure, and
they be remarkably injured by any vitiation of it[19].”

§ 16. But no precautions relative to the reception of patients who labour
under maladies incapable of relief, contagious in their nature, or liable
to be aggravated by confinement in an impure atmosphere, can obviate
the evils arising from close wards, and the false economy of crowding
a number of persons into the least possible space. There are inbred
diseases which it is the duty of the Physician or Surgeon to prevent, as
far as lies in his power, by a strict and persevering attention to the
whole medical polity of the hospital. This comprehends the discrimination
of cases admissible, air, diet, cleanliness, and drugs; each of which
articles should be subjected to a rigid scrutiny at stated periods of
time.

§ 17. The establishment of a committee of the gentlemen of the
Faculty, to be held monthly, would tend to facilitate this interesting
investigation, and to accomplish the most important objects of it. By the
free communication of remarks, various improvements would be suggested;
by the regular discussion of them, they would be reduced to a definite
and consistent form; and by the authority of united suffrages, they would
have full influence over the governors of the charity. The exertions
of individuals, however benevolent or judicious, often give rise to
jealousy, are opposed by those who have not been consulted, and prove
inefficient by wanting the collective energy of numbers.

§ 18. The harmonious intercourse which has been recommended to the
gentlemen of the Faculty will naturally produce frequent consultations,
viz. of the Physicians on Medical cases, of the Surgeons on Chirurgical
cases, and of both united in cases of a compound nature, which, falling
under the department of each, may admit of elucidation by the reciprocal
aid of the two professions.

§ 19. In consultations on Medical cases the junior Physician present
should deliver his opinion first, and the others in the progressive
order of their seniority. The same order should be observed in
Chirurgical cases; and a majority should be decisive in both: but if the
numbers be equal, the decision should rest with the Physician or Surgeon
under whose care the patient is placed. No decision, however, should
restrain the acting practitioner from making such variations in the mode
of treatment, as future contingencies may require, or a farther insight
into the nature of the disorder may shew to be expedient.

§ 20. In consultations on mixed cases the junior Surgeon should deliver
his opinion first, and his brethren afterwards in succession, according
to progressive seniority. The junior Physician present should deliver his
opinion after the senior Surgeon, and the other Physicians in the order
above prescribed.

§ 21. In every consultation the case to be considered should be concisely
stated by the Physician or Surgeon who requests the aid of his brethren.
The opinions relative to it should be delivered with brevity, agreeably
to the preceding arrangement, and the decisions collected in the same
order. The order of seniority among the Physicians and Surgeons may be
regulated by the dates of their respective appointments in the hospital.

§ 22. Due notice should be given of a consultation, and no person
admitted to it except the Physicians and Surgeons of the hospital,
and the House-Surgeon, without the unanimous consent of the gentlemen
present. If an examination of the patient be previously necessary, the
particular circumstances of danger or difficulty should be carefully
concealed from him, and every just precaution used to guard him from
anxiety or alarm.

§ 23. No important operation should be determined upon, without a
consultation of the Physicians and Surgeons, and the acquiescence of
a majority of them. Twenty-four hours notice should be given of the
proposed operation, except in dangerous accidents, or when peculiar
circumstances occur which may render delay hazardous. The presence of
a spectator should not be allowed during an operation, without the
express permission of the operator. All extra-official interference in
the management of it should be forbidden. A decorous silence ought to
be observed. It may be humane and salutary, however, for one of the
attending Physicians or Surgeons to speak occasionally to the patient,
to comfort him under his sufferings, and to give him assurance (if
consistent with truth,) that the operation goes on well, and promises a
speedy and successful termination[20].

As a hospital is the best school for practical Surgery, it would be
liberal and beneficial to invite in rotation two Surgeons of the town,
who do not belong to the institution, to be present at each operation.

§ 24. Hospital consultations ought not to be held on Sundays, except
in cases of urgent necessity; and on such occasions an hour should be
appointed which does not interfere with attendance on public worship.

§ 25. It is an established usage in some hospitals to have a stated day
in the week for the performance of operations. But this may occasion
improper delay, or equally unjustifiable anticipation. When several
operations are to take place in succession, one patient should not
have his mind agitated by the knowledge of the sufferings of another.
The Surgeon should change his apron, when besmeared; and the table or
instruments should be freed from all marks of blood, and every thing that
may excite terror.

§ 26. Dispensaries afford the widest sphere for the treatment of
diseases, comprehending not only such as ordinarily occur, but those
which are so infectious, malignant, and fatal, as to be excluded from
admission into infirmaries. Happily also they neither tend to counteract
that spirit of independence which should be sedulously fostered in the
poor, nor to preclude the practical exercise of those relative duties,
“the charities of father, son, and brother,” which constitute the
strongest moral bonds of society. Being institutions less splendid and
expensive than hospitals, they are well adapted to towns of moderate
size; and might even be established without difficulty in populous
country districts. Physicians and Surgeons in such situations have
generally great influence; and it would be truly honourable to exert it
in a cause subservient to the interests of Medical science, of commerce,
and of philanthropy.

The duties which devolve on gentlemen of the Faculty engaged in
the conduct of Dispensaries, are so nearly similar to those of
hospital Physicians and Surgeons, as to be comprehended under the
same professional and moral rules. But greater authority and greater
condescension will be found requisite in domestic attendance on the
poor; and human nature must be intimately studied, to acquire that full
ascendancy over the prejudices, the caprices, and the passions of the
sick and of their relatives, which is essential to Medical success.

§ 27. Hospitals appropriated to particular maladies are established
in different places, and claim both the patronage and the aid of the
gentlemen of the Faculty. To an asylum for female patients labouring
under syphilis it is to be lamented that discouragements have been too
often and successfully opposed. Yet whoever reflects on the variety
of diseases to which the human body is incident, will find that a
considerable part of them are derived from immoderate passions and
vicious indulgences. Sloth, intemperance, and irregular desires are the
great sources of those evils which contract the duration and imbitter
the enjoyment of life. But humanity, whilst she bewails the vices of
mankind, incites us to alleviate the miseries which flow from them. And
it may be proved that a Lock Hospital is an institution founded on the
most benevolent principles, consonant to sound policy, and favourable to
reformation and to virtue. It provides relief for a painful and loathsome
distemper, which contaminates in its progress the innocent as well as
the guilty, and extends its baneful influence to future generations.
It restores to virtue and to religion those votaries whom pleasure has
seduced or villany betrayed, and who now feel by sad experience that
ruin, misery, and disgrace are the wages of sin. Over such objects
pity sheds the generous tear, austerity softens into forgiveness, and
benevolence expands at the united pleas of frailty, penitence, and
wretchedness[21].

No peculiar rules of conduct are requisite in the Medical attendance on
Lock Hospitals: but, as these institutions must from the nature of their
object be in a great measure shut from the inspection of the public,
it will behove the Faculty to consider themselves as responsible in an
extraordinary degree for their right government; that the moral, no less
than the Medical purposes of such establishments may be fully answered.
The strictest decorum should be observed in the conduct towards the
female patients; no young pupils should be admitted into the house; every
ministering office should be performed by nurses properly instructed; and
books adapted to the moral improvement of the patients should be put into
their hands, and given them on their discharge. To provide against the
danger of urgent want, a small sum of money and decent clothes should at
this time be dispensed to them; and, when practicable, some mode should
be pointed out of obtaining a reputable livelihood.

§ 28. Asylums for insanity possess accommodations and advantages, of
which the poor must in all circumstances be destitute; and which no
private family, however opulent, can provide. Of these schemes of
benevolence all classes of men may have equal occasion to participate the
benefits; for human nature itself becomes the mournful object of such
institutions. Other diseases leave man a rational and moral agent, and
sometimes improve both the faculties of the head and the affections of
the heart. But lunacy subverts the whole rational and moral character,
extinguishes every tender charity, and excludes the degraded sufferer
from all the enjoyments and advantages of social intercourse. Painful is
the office of a Physician, when he is called upon to minister to such
humiliating objects of distress; yet great must be his felicity, when he
can render himself instrumental, under Providence, in the restoration of
reason and in the renewal of the lost image of GOD. Let no one, however,
promise himself this divine privilege, if he be not deeply skilled in
the philosophy of human nature; for, though casual success may sometimes
be the result of empirical practice, the _medicina mentis_ can only be
administered with steady efficacy by him, who, to a knowledge of the
animal economy and of the physical causes which regulate or disturb its
movements, unites an intimate acquaintance with the laws of association,
the control of fancy over judgement, the force of habit, the direction
and comparative strength of opposite passions, and the reciprocal
dependences and relations of the moral and intellectual powers of man.

§ 29. Even thus qualified with the pre-requisite attainments, the
Physician will find that he has a new region of Medical science to
explore; for it is a circumstance to be regretted both by the Faculty
and the public, that the various diseases which are classed under the
title of insanity remain less understood than any others with which
mankind are visited. Hospital institutions furnish the best means of
acquiring more accurate knowledge of their causes, nature, and cure;
but this information cannot be attained, to any satisfactory extent, by
the ordinary attention to single and unconnected cases. The synthetic
plan should be adopted; and a regular journal should be kept of every
species of the malady which occurs, arranged under proper heads, with
a full detail of its rise, progress, and termination; of the remedies
administered, and of their effects in its several stages. The age, sex,
occupation, mode of life, and (if possible,) hereditary constitution
of each patient should be noted; and, when the event proves fatal, the
brain and other organs affected should be carefully examined, and the
appearances on dissection minutely inserted in the journal. A register
like this in the course of a few years would afford the most interesting
and authentic documents, the want of which on a late melancholy
occasion[22] was felt and regretted by the whole kingdom.

§ 30. Lunatics are in a great measure secluded from the observation of
those who are interested in their good treatment; and their complaints of
ill-usage are so often false or fanciful, as to obtain little credit or
attention, even when well founded. The Physician, therefore, must feel
himself under the strictest obligation of honour, as well as of humanity,
to secure to these unhappy sufferers all the tenderness and indulgence
compatible with steady and effectual government.

§ 31. Certain cases of mania seem to require a boldness of practice,
which a young Physician of sensibility may feel a reluctance to adopt. On
such occasions he must not yield to timidity, but fortify his mind by the
councils of his more experienced brethren of the Faculty. Yet, with this
aid, it is more consonant to probity to err on the side of caution than
of temerity[23].

Hospitals for the small-pox, for inoculation, for cancers, &c. &c., are
established in different places; but require no professional duties,
which are not included under, or deducible from, the precepts already
delivered.


FOOTNOTES:

[19] See Aikin’s _Thoughts on Hospitals_, p. 21.

[20] The substance of the five preceding articles (§§ 19-23) was
suggested by Dr. Ferriar and Mr. Simmons, at the time when I was desired
by them and my other colleagues to frame a code of rules for the
Manchester Infirmary. The additions now made are intended to adapt them
to general use.

[21] See two Reports, intended to promote the establishment of a Lock
Hospital at Manchester, in the year 1774, inserted in the Author’s
_Essays Medical, Philosophical, and Experimental_, vol. ii. p. 263.
(_Works_, vol. iv. p. 203.)

[22] [Alluding to the case of George III.]

[23] See Notes and Illustrations, No. I.




CHAPTER II.

_Of Professional Conduct in Private or General Practice._


§ 1. The moral rules of conduct prescribed towards hospital patients
should be fully adopted in private or general practice. Every case
committed to the charge of a Physician or Surgeon should be treated with
attention, steadiness, and humanity; reasonable indulgence should be
granted to the mental imbecility and caprices of the sick; secrecy and
delicacy, when required by peculiar circumstances, should be strictly
observed; and the familiar and confidential intercourse, to which the
Faculty are admitted in their professional visits, should be used with
discretion, and with the most scrupulous regard to fidelity and honour.

§ 2. The strictest temperance should be deemed incumbent on the Faculty;
as the practice both of Physic and Surgery at all times requires the
exercise of a clear and vigorous understanding: and on emergencies, for
which no professional man should be unprepared, a steady hand, an acute
eye, and an unclouded head, may be essential to the well-being, and even
to the life, of a fellow-creature. Philip of Macedon reposed with entire
security on the vigilance and attention of his general Parmenio. In his
hours of mirth and conviviality he was wont to say, “Let us drink, my
friends; we may do it with safety, for Parmenio never drinks!” The moral
of this story is sufficiently obvious when applied to the Faculty; but it
should certainly be construed with great limitation by their patients[24].

§ 3. A Physician should not be forward to make gloomy prognostications;
because they savour of empiricism, by magnifying the importance of his
services in the treatment or cure of the disease. But he should not fail
on proper occasions to give to the friends of the patient timely notice
of danger when it really occurs, and even to the patient himself, if
absolutely necessary. This office, however, is so peculiarly alarming
when executed by him, that it ought to be declined whenever it can be
assigned to any other person of sufficient judgement and delicacy; for
the Physician should be the minister of hope and comfort to the sick,
that by such cordials to the drooping spirit he may smooth the bed of
death, revive expiring life, and counteract the depressing influence of
those maladies, which rob the philosopher of fortitude, and the Christian
of consolation[25].

§ 4. Officious interference in a case under the charge of another should
be carefully avoided. No meddling enquiries should be made concerning the
patient, no unnecessary hints given relative to the nature or treatment
of his disorder, nor any selfish conduct pursued, that may directly
or indirectly tend to diminish the trust reposed in the Physician or
Surgeon employed. Yet, though the character of a professional busy-body,
whether from thoughtlessness or craft, is highly reprehensible, there are
occasions which not only justify, but require, a spirited interposition.
When artful ignorance grossly imposes on credulity, when neglect puts
to hazard an important life, or rashness threatens it with still more
imminent danger, a Medical neighbour, friend, or relative, apprized of
such facts, will justly regard his interference as a duty. But he ought
to be careful that the information on which he acts is well founded,
that his motives are pure and honourable, and that his judgement of the
measures pursued is built on experience and practical knowledge, not
on speculative or theoretical differences of opinion. The particular
circumstances of the case will suggest the most proper mode of conduct.
In general, however, a personal and confidential application to the
gentleman of the Faculty concerned, should be the first step taken, and
afterwards, if necessary, the transaction may be communicated to the
patient or to his family.

§ 5. When a Physician or Surgeon is called to a patient who has been
before under the care of another gentleman of the Faculty, a consultation
with him should be proposed, even though he may have discontinued his
visits. His practice also should be treated with candour, and justified,
so far as probity and truth will permit: for the want of success in the
primary treatment of a case is no impeachment of professional skill or
knowledge; and it often serves to throw light on the nature of a disease,
and to suggest to the subsequent practitioner more appropriate means of
relief[26].

§ 6. In large and opulent towns the distinction between the provinces of
Physic and Surgery should be steadily maintained. This distinction is
sanctioned both by reason and experience. It is founded on the nature
and objects of the two professions; on the education and acquirements
requisite for their most beneficial and honourable exercise; and tends
to promote the complete cultivation and advancement of each. For the
division of skill and labour is no less advantageous in the liberal than
in the mechanic arts; and both Physic and Surgery are so comprehensive,
and yet so far from perfection, as separately to give full scope to
the industry and genius of their respective professors. Experience has
fully evinced the benefits of the discrimination recommended, which is
established in every well regulated hospital, and is thus expressly
authorized by the Faculty themselves, and by those who have the best
opportunities of judging of the proper application of the healing art. No
Physician or Surgeon, therefore, should adopt more than one denomination,
or assume any rank or privileges different from those of his order.

§ 7. Consultations should be promoted in difficult or protracted cases,
as they give rise to confidence, energy, and more enlarged views in
practice. On such occasions no rivalship or jealousy should be indulged:
candour, probity, and all due respect should be exercised towards the
Physician or Surgeon first engaged; and, as he may be presumed to be best
acquainted with the patient and with his family, he should deliver all
the medical directions agreed upon, though he may not have precedency
in seniority or rank. It should be the province, however, of the senior
Physician, first to propose the necessary questions to the sick, but
without excluding his associate from the privilege of making farther
enquiries, to satisfy himself, or to elucidate the case.

§ 8. As circumstances sometimes occur to render a special consultation
desirable, when the continued attendance of another Physician or Surgeon
might be objectionable to the patient, the gentleman of the Faculty whose
assistance is required, in such cases, should pay only two or three
visits, and sedulously guard against all future unsolicited interference.
For this consultation a double gratuity may reasonably be expected from
the patient, as it will be found to require an extraordinary portion both
of time and attention.

In Medical practice it is not an unfrequent occurrence, that a
Physician is hastily summoned, through the anxiety of the family or the
solicitation of friends, to visit a patient who is under the regular
direction of another Physician, to whom notice of this call has not been
given. Under such circumstances no change in the treatment of the sick
person should be made, till a previous consultation with the stated
Physician has taken place, unless the lateness of the hour precludes
meeting, or the symptoms of the case are too pressing to admit of delay.

§ 9. Theoretical discussions should be avoided in consultations, as
occasioning perplexity and loss of time; for there may be much diversity
of opinion concerning speculative points, with perfect agreement in those
modes of practice which are founded not on hypothesis, but on experience
and observation[27].

§ 10. The rules prescribed for hospital consultations may be adopted
in private or general practice[28]. And the seniority of a Physician
may be determined by the period of his public and acknowledged practice
as a Physician, and that of a Surgeon by the period of his practice as
a Surgeon, in the place where each resides. This arrangement, being
clear and obvious, is adapted to remove all grounds of dispute amongst
Medical gentlemen; and it secures the regular continuance of the order of
precedency established in every town, which might otherwise be liable to
troublesome interruptions by new settlers, perhaps not long stationary.

§ 11. A regular academical education furnishes the only presumptive
evidence of professional ability, and is so honourable and beneficial,
that it gives a just claim to pre-eminence among Physicians, in
proportion to the degree in which it has been enjoyed and improved.
Yet, as it is not indispensably necessary to the attainment of
knowledge, skill, and experience, they who have really acquired in a
competent measure such qualifications without its advantages, should
not be fastidiously excluded from the privileges of fellowship. In
consultations especially, as the good of the patient is the sole object
in view, and is often dependent on personal confidence, the aid of an
(_any?_) intelligent practitioner ought to be received with candour and
politeness, and his advice adopted, if agreeable to sound judgement and
truth[29].

§ 12. Punctuality should be observed in the visits of the Faculty, when
they are to hold consultation together; but, as this may not always be
practicable, the Physician or Surgeon who first arrives at the place
of appointment, should wait five minutes for his associate, before
his introduction to the patient, that the unnecessary repetition of
questions may be avoided. No visits should be made but in concert, or
by mutual agreement; no statement or discussion of the case should take
place before the patient or his friends, except in the presence of each
of the attending gentlemen of the Faculty, and by common consent; and
no prognostications should be delivered, which are not the result of
previous deliberation and concurrence.

§ 13. Visits to the sick should not be unseasonably repeated; because,
when too frequent, they tend to diminish the authority of the Physician,
to produce instability in his practice, and to give rise to such
occasional indulgences, as are subversive of all Medical regimen.

Sir William Temple has asserted, that “an honest Physician is excused
for leaving his patient, when he finds the disease growing desperate,
and can, by his attendance, expect only to receive his fees, without
any hopes or appearance of deserving them.” But this allegation is not
well founded; for the offices of a Physician may continue to be highly
useful to the patient and comforting to the relatives around him even in
the last period of a fatal malady, by obviating despair, by alleviating
pain, and by soothing mental anguish. To decline attendance under such
circumstances would be sacrificing to fanciful delicacy and mistaken
liberality that moral duty which is independent of, and far superior to,
all pecuniary appreciation.

§ 14. Whenever a Physician or Surgeon officiates for another who is sick
or absent during any considerable length of time, he should receive the
fees accruing from such additional practice; but, if this fraternal
act be of short duration, it should be gratuitously performed, with
an observance always of the utmost delicacy towards the interest and
character of the professional gentleman previously connected with the
family.

§ 15. Some general rule should be adopted by the Faculty in every town
relative to the pecuniary acknowledgements of their patients; and it
should be deemed a point of honour to adhere to this rule with as much
steadiness as varying circumstances will admit: for it is obvious that
an average fee, as suited to the general rank of patients, must be an
inadequate gratuity from the rich, who often require attendance not
absolutely necessary, and yet too large to be expected from that class of
citizens, who would feel a reluctance in calling for assistance without
making some decent and satisfactory retribution.

But in the consideration of fees, let it ever be remembered, that,
though mean ones from the affluent are both unjust and degrading, yet
the characteristical beneficence of the Profession is inconsistent with
sordid views and avaricious rapacity. To a young Physician it is of
great importance to have clear and definite ideas of the ends of his
Profession, of the means for their attainment, and of the comparative
value and dignity of each. Wealth, rank, and independence, with all the
benefits resulting from them, are the primary[30] ends which he holds
in view; and they are interesting, wise, and laudable: but knowledge,
benevolence, and active virtue, the means to be adopted in their
acquisition, are of still higher estimation; and he has the privilege and
felicity of practising an art, even more intrinsically excellent in its
mediate than in its ultimate objects. The former, therefore, have a claim
to uniform pre-eminence[31].

§ 16. All members of the Profession (including Apothecaries, as well as
Physicians and Surgeons,) together with their wives and children, should
be attended gratuitously by any one or more of the Faculty residing near
them whose assistance may be required; for, as solicitude obscures the
judgement, and is accompanied with timidity and irresolution. Medical
men, under the pressure of sickness, either as affecting themselves or
their families, are peculiarly dependent upon each other. But visits
should not be obtruded officiously; as such unasked civility may give
rise to embarrassment, or interfere with that choice on which confidence
depends. Distant members of the Faculty, when they request attendance,
should be expected to defray the charges of travelling; and, if their
circumstances be affluent, a pecuniary acknowledgement should not be
declined: for no obligation ought to be imposed, which the party would
rather compensate than contract.

§ 17. When a Physician attends the wife or child of a member of the
Faculty, or any person very nearly connected with him, he should
manifest peculiar attention to his opinions, and tenderness even to his
prejudices. For the dear and important interests which the one has at
stake, supersede every consideration of rank or seniority in the other;
since the mind of a husband, a father, or a friend, may receive a deep
and lasting wound, if the disease terminate fatally, from the adoption
of means he could not approve, or the rejection of those he wished to
be tried. Under such delicate circumstances, however, a conscientious
Physician will not lightly sacrifice his judgement; but will urge with
proper confidence the measures he deems to be expedient, before he leaves
the final decision concerning them to his more responsible coadjutor.

§ 18. Clergymen who experience the “res angusta domi” should be visited
gratuitously by the Faculty. And this exemption should be an acknowledged
general rule, that the feeling of individual obligation may be rendered
less oppressive. But such of the clergy as are qualified either from
their stipends or fortunes to make a reasonable remuneration for Medical
attendance, are not more privileged than any other order of patients.
Military or naval subaltern officers in narrow circumstances are also
proper objects of professional liberality.

§ 19. As the first consultation by letter imposes much more trouble and
attention than a personal visit, it is reasonable on such an occasion to
expect a gratuity of double the usual amount: and this has long been the
established practice of many respectable Physicians. But a subsequent
epistolary correspondence on the further treatment of the same disorder
may justly be regarded in the light of ordinary attendance, and may be
compensated as such according to the circumstances of the case or of the
patient.

§ 20. Physicians and Surgeons are occasionally requested to furnish
certificates, justifying the absence of persons who hold situations of
honour and trust in the army, the navy, or the civil departments of
government. These testimonials, unless under particular circumstances,
should be considered as acts due to the public, and therefore not to be
compensated by any gratuity. But they should never be given without an
accurate and faithful scrutiny into the case; that truth and probity
may not be violated, nor the good of the community injured, by the
unjust pretences of its servants. The same conduct is to be observed by
Medical practitioners when they are solicited to furnish apologies for
non-attendance on juries, or to state the valetudinary incapacity of
persons appointed to execute the business of constables, church-wardens,
or overseers of the poor. No fear of giving umbrage, no view to present
or future emolument, nor any motives of friendship, should incite to a
false, or even dubious declaration; for the general weal requires that
every individual who is properly qualified should deem himself obliged
to execute, when legally called upon, the juridical and municipal
employments of the body politic; and to be accessory by untruth or
prevarication to the evasion of this duty, is at once a high misdemeanour
against social order, and a breach of moral and professional honour.

§ 21. The use of quack medicines should be discouraged by the Faculty, as
disgraceful to the Profession, injurious to health, and often destructive
even of life. Patients, however, under lingering disorders, are sometimes
obstinately bent on having recourse to such as they see advertised or
hear recommended with a boldness and confidence which no intelligent
Physician dares to adopt with respect to the means that he prescribes. In
these cases, some indulgence seems to be required to a credulity that
is insurmountable; and the patient should neither incur the displeasure
of the Physician, nor be entirely deserted by him. He may be apprized of
the fallacy of his expectations, whilst assured at the same time that
diligent attention should be paid to the process of the experiment he
is so unadvisedly making on himself, and the consequent mischiefs, if
any, obviated as timely as possible. Certain active preparations, the
nature, composition, and effects of which are well known, ought not to be
proscribed as quack medicines.

§ 22. No Physician or Surgeon should dispense a secret nostrum,
whether it be his invention, or exclusive property; for, if it be of
real efficacy, the concealment of it is inconsistent with beneficence
and professional liberality; and if mystery alone give it value and
importance, such craft implies either disgraceful ignorance or fraudulent
avarice.

§ 23. The _esprit du corps_ is a principle of action founded in human
nature, and, when duly regulated, is both rational and laudable. Every
man who enters into a fraternity engages by a tacit compact not only
to submit to the laws, but to promote the honour and interest, of the
association, so far as they are consistent with morality and the general
good of mankind. A Physician, therefore, should cautiously guard against
whatever may injure the general respectability of his Profession; and
should avoid all contumelious representations of the Faculty at large,
all general charges against their selfishness or improbity, and the
indulgence of an affected or jocular scepticism concerning the efficacy
and utility of the healing art.

§ 24. As diversity of opinion and opposition of interest may in the
Medical, as in other professions, sometimes occasion controversy and
even contention; whenever such cases unfortunately occur, and cannot be
immediately terminated, they should be referred to the arbitration of a
sufficient number of Physicians or of Surgeons, according to the nature
of the dispute; or to the two orders collectively, if belonging both to
Medicine and Surgery. But neither the subject matter of such references,
nor the adjudication, should be communicated to the public; as they may
be personally injurious to the individuals concerned, and can hardly fail
to hurt the general credit of the Faculty.

§ 25. A wealthy Physician should not give advice gratis to the affluent,
because it is an injury to his professional brethren. The office of
Physician can never be supported but as a lucrative one, and it is
defrauding in some degree the common funds for its support, when fees
are dispensed with, which might justly be claimed.

§ 26. It frequently happens that a Physician, in his incidental
communications with the patients of other Physicians or with their
friends, may have their cases stated to him in so direct a manner, as
not to admit of his declining to pay attention to them. Under such
circumstances his observations should be delivered with the most delicate
propriety and reserve: he should not interfere in the curative plans
pursued, and should even recommend a steady adherence to them, if they
appear to merit approbation.

§ 27. A Physician, when visiting a sick person in the country, may be
desired to see a neighbouring patient who is under the regular direction
of another Physician, in consequence of some sudden change or aggravation
of symptoms. The conduct to be pursued on such an occasion is to give
advice adapted to present circumstances, to interfere no farther than
is absolutely necessary with the general plan of treatment, to assume
no future direction unless it be expressly desired, and, in this case,
to request an immediate consultation with the practitioner antecedently
employed.

§ 28. At the close of every interesting and important case (especially
when it hath terminated fatally,) a Physician should trace back in calm
reflection all the steps which he had [_has?_] taken in the treatment of
it. This review of the origin, progress, and conclusion of the malady,
of the whole curative plan pursued, and of the particular operation of
the several remedies employed, as well as of the doses and periods of
time in which they were administered, will furnish the most authentic
documents on which individual experience can be formed. But it is in
a moral view that the practice is here recommended; and it should be
performed with the most scrupulous impartiality. Let no self-deception
be permitted in the retrospect; and, if errors either of omission or
commission are discovered, it behoves that they should be brought fairly
and fully to the mental view. Regrets may follow, but criminality
will thus be obviated; for good intentions, and the imperfection of
human skill which cannot anticipate the knowledge that events alone
disclose, will sufficiently justify what is past, provided the failure
be made conscientiously subservient to future wisdom and rectitude in
professional conduct.

§ 29. The opportunities which a Physician not unfrequently enjoys,
of promoting and strengthening the good resolutions of his patients
suffering under the consequences of vicious conduct, ought never to
be neglected. And his counsels, or even remonstrances, will give
satisfaction, not disgust, if they be conducted with politeness, and
evince a genuine love of virtue, accompanied by a sincere interest in the
welfare of the person to whom they are addressed.

§ 30. The observance of the Sabbath is a duty to which Medical men are
bound, so far as is compatible with the urgency of the cases under their
charge. Visits may often be made with sufficient convenience and benefit,
either before the hours of going to church, or during the intervals of
public worship; and in many chronic ailments the sick, together with
their attendants, are qualified to participate in the social offices of
religion, and should not be induced to forego this important privilege by
the expectation of a call from their Physician or Surgeon[32].

§ 31. A Physician who is advancing in years, yet unconscious of any
decay in his faculties, may occasionally experience some change in the
wonted confidence of his friends. Patients, who before trusted solely to
his care and skill, may now request that he will join in consultation,
perhaps with a younger coadjutor. It behoves him to admit this change
without dissatisfaction or fastidiousness, regarding it as no mark of
disrespect, but as the exercise of a just and reasonable privilege in
those by whom he is employed. The junior practitioner may well be
supposed to have more ardour than _he_ possesses in the treatment of
diseases, to be bolder in the exhibition of new medicines, and disposed
to administer old ones in doses of greater efficacy. And this union of
enterprise with caution, and of fervour with coolness, may promote the
successful management of a difficult and protracted case. Let the Medical
parties, therefore, be studious to conduct themselves towards each other
with candour and impartiality; co-operating by mutual concessions in the
benevolent discharge of professional duty[33].

§ 32. The commencement of that period of senescence, when it becomes
incumbent on a Physician to decline the offices of his profession, it
is not easy to ascertain; and the decision on so nice a point must be
left to the moral discretion of the individual. For, one grown old in
the useful and honourable exercise of the healing art, may continue
to enjoy, and justly to enjoy, the unabated confidence of the public;
and, whilst exempt in a considerable degree from the privations and
infirmities of age, he is under indispensable obligations to apply his
knowledge and experience in the most efficient way to the benefit of
mankind: for the possession of powers is a clear indication of the will
of our Creator concerning their practical direction. But in the ordinary
course of nature the bodily and mental vigour must be expected to decay
progressively, though perhaps slowly, after the meridian of life is
past. As age advances, therefore, a Physician should from time to time
scrutinize impartially the state of his faculties, that he may determine
_bona fide_ the precise degree in which he is qualified to execute the
active and multifarious offices of his profession; and, whenever he
becomes conscious that his memory presents to him with faintness those
analogies on which Medical reasoning and the treatment of diseases are
founded, that diffidence of the measures to be pursued perplexes his
judgment, that, from a deficiency in the acuteness of his senses, he
finds himself less able to distinguish signs or to prognosticate events,
he should at once resolve (though others perceive not the changes which
have taken place,) to sacrifice every consideration of fame or fortune,
and to retire from the engagements of business. To the Surgeon under
similar circumstances this rule of conduct is still more necessary; for
the energy of the understanding often subsists much longer than the
quickness of eye-sight, delicacy of touch, and steadiness of hand, which
are essential to the skilful performance of operations. Let both the
Physician and Surgeon never forget that their professions are public
trusts, properly rendered lucrative whilst they fulfil them, but which
they are bound by honour and probity to relinquish as soon as they find
themselves unequal to their adequate and faithful execution.


FOOTNOTES:

[24] See Notes and Illustrations, No. II.

[25] See Notes and Illustrations, No. III.

[26] See Notes and Illustrations, No. IV.

[27] See Notes and Illustrations, No. V.

[28] See above, chap. i. §§ 19-21.

[29] See Notes and Illustrations, No. VI.

[30] [The word _primary_ is omitted in ed. 1807.]

[31] See Notes and Illustrations, No. VII.

[32] See Notes and Illustrations, No. VIII.

[33] See Notes and Illustrations, No. IX.




CHAPTER III.

_Of the Conduct of Physicians towards Apothecaries._


§ 1. In the present state of Physic in this country, where the Profession
is properly divided into three distinct branches, a connection peculiarly
intimate subsists between the Physician and the Apothecary; and various
obligations necessarily result from it. On the knowledge, skill, and
fidelity of the Apothecary depend in a very considerable degree the
reputation, the success, and usefulness of the Physician. As these
qualities, therefore, justly claim his attention and encouragement, the
possessor of them merits his respect and patronage.

§ 2. The Apothecary is in almost every instance the precursor of the
Physician; and, being acquainted with the rise and progress of the
disease, with the hereditary constitution, habits, and disposition of
the patient, he may furnish very important information. It is in general
therefore expedient (and, when health or life are at stake, expediency
becomes a moral duty,) to confer with the Apothecary before any decisive
plan of treatment is adopted, to hear his account of the malady, of the
remedies which have been administered, of the effects produced by them,
and of his whole experience concerning the _juvantia_ and _laedentia_
in the case. Nor should the future attendance of the Apothecary be
superseded by the Physician; for, if he be a man of honour, judgement,
and propriety of behaviour, he will be a most valuable auxiliary through
the whole course of the disorder, by his attention to varying symptoms,
by the enforcement of Medical directions, by obviating misapprehensions
in the patient or his family, by strengthening the authority of the
Physician, and by being at all times an easy and friendly medium of
communication. To subserve these important purposes, the Physician
should occasionally make his visits in conjunction with the Apothecary,
and regulate by circumstances the frequency of such interviews; for, if
they be often repeated, little substantial aid can be expected from the
Apothecary, because he will have no intelligence to offer which does not
fall under the observation of the Physician himself, nor any opportunity
of executing his peculiar trust, without becoming burdensome to the
patient by multiplied calls and unseasonable assiduity.

§ 3. This amicable intercourse and co-operation of the Physician and
Apothecary, if conducted with the decorum and attention to etiquette
which should always be steadily observed by professional men, will add
to the authority of the one, to the respectability of the other, and
to the usefulness of both. The patient will find himself the object of
watchful and unremitting care, and will experience that he is connected
with his Physician, not only personally, but by a sedulous representative
and coadjutor. The Apothecary will regard the free communication of the
Physician as a privilege and mean of improvement, he will have a deeper
interest in the success of the curative plans pursued, and his honour
and reputation will be directly involved in the purity and excellence of
the medicines dispensed, and in the skill and care with which they are
compounded.

§ 4. The duty and responsibility of the Physician, however, are so
intimately connected with these points, that no dependence on the probity
of the Apothecary should prevent the occasional inspection of the drugs
which he prescribes. In London the law not only authorizes, but enjoins,
a stated examination of the simple and compound medicines kept in the
shops; and the policy that is just and reasonable in the metropolis, must
be proportionably so in every provincial town throughout the kingdom.
Nor will any respectable Apothecary object to this necessary office, when
performed with delicacy and at seasonable times; since his reputation
and emolument will be increased by it, probably in the exact ratio, thus
ascertained, of professional merit and integrity.

§ 5. A Physician called to visit a patient in the country, should
not only be minute in his directions, but should communicate to the
Apothecary the particular view which he takes of the case; that the
indications of cure may be afterwards pursued with precision and
steadiness, and that the Apothecary may use the discretionary power
committed to him, with as little deviation as possible from the
general plan prescribed. To so valuable a class of men as the country
Apothecaries great attention and respect is due; and, as they are the
guardians of health through large districts, no opportunities should
be neglected of promoting their improvement, or contributing to their
stock of knowledge, either by the loan of books, the direction of their
studies, or by unreserved information on Medical subjects. When such
occasions present themselves, the maxim of our judicious poet[34] is
strictly true,

    “The worst avarice is that of sense;”

for practical improvements usually originate in towns, and often remain
unknown or disregarded in situations where gentlemen of the Faculty have
little intercourse, and where sufficient authority is wanting to sanction
innovation.

§ 6. It has been observed by a political and moral writer of great
authority[35], that “Apothecaries’ profit is become a bye-word, denoting
something uncommonly extravagant. This great apparent profit, however,
is frequently no more than the reasonable wages of labour. The skill of
an Apothecary is a much nicer and more delicate matter than that of any
artificer whatever, and the trust which is reposed in him is of much
greater importance. He is the Physician of the poor in all cases, and
of the rich when the distress or danger is not very great. His reward
therefore ought to be suitable to his skill and his trust, and it arises
generally from the price at which he sells his drugs. But the whole drugs
which the best employed Apothecary in a large market town will sell in a
year, may not perhaps cost him above thirty or forty pounds. Though he
should sell them, therefore, for three or four hundred, or at a thousand
per cent. profit, this may frequently be no more than the reasonable
wages of his labour, charged, in the only way in which he can charge
them, upon the price of his drugs.” The statement here given exceeds the
emoluments of the generality of Apothecaries in country districts. And a
Physician, who knows the education, skill, and persevering attention, as
well as the sacrifice of ease, health, and sometimes even of life, which
this profession requires, should regard it as a duty not to withdraw from
those who exercise it any sources of reasonable profit, or the honourable
means of advancement in fortune. Two practices prevail in some places
injurious to the interest of this branch of the Faculty, and which ought
to be discouraged: one consists in suffering prescriptions to be sent to
the druggist, for the sake of a small saving in expense; the other in
receiving an annual stipend (usually degrading in its amount, and in the
services it imposes,) for being consulted on the slighter indispositions
to which all families are incident, and which properly fall within the
province of the Apothecary.

§ 7. Physicians are sometimes requested to visit the patients of the
Apothecary in his absence. Compliance in such cases should always be
refused, when it is likely to interfere with the consultation of the
Medical gentleman ordinarily employed by the sick person or his family.
Indeed this practice is so liable to abuse, and requires in its exercise
so much caution and delicacy, that it would be for the interest and
honour of the Faculty to have it altogether interdicted. Physicians are
the only proper substitutes for Physicians, Surgeons for Surgeons, and
Apothecaries for Apothecaries.

§ 8. When the aid of a Physician is required, the Apothecary to the
family is frequently called upon to recommend one. It will then
behove him to learn fully whether the patient or his friends have any
preference or partiality; and this he ought to consult, if it lead not
to an improper choice; for the maxim of Celsus is strictly applicable
on such an occasion, “Ubi par scientia, melior est amicus medicus quam
extraneus[36].” But if the parties concerned be entirely indifferent,
the Apothecary is bound to decide according to his best judgement, with
a conscientious and exclusive regard to the good of the person for whom
he is commissioned to act. It is not even sufficient that he selects the
person on whom in sickness he reposes his own trust; for in this case
friendship justly gives preponderancy, because it may be supposed to
excite a degree of zeal and attention, which might overbalance superior
science or abilities. Without favour or regard to any personal, family,
or professional connections, he should recommend the Physician whom
he conscientiously believes, all circumstances considered, to be best
qualified to accomplish the recovery of the patient.

§ 9. In the county of Norfolk, and in the city of London, benevolent
institutions have been lately formed, for providing funds to relieve the
widows and children of Apothecaries, and occasionally also members of
the Profession who become indigent[37]. Such schemes merit the sanction
and encouragement of every liberal Physician and Surgeon; and were they
thus extended, their usefulness would be greatly increased, and their
permanency almost with certainty secured. Medical subscribers from every
part of Great Britain should be admitted, if they offer satisfactory
testimonials of their qualifications. One comprehensive establishment
seems to be more eligible than many on a smaller scale; for it would be
conducted with superior dignity, regularity, and efficiency, with fewer
obstacles from interest, prejudice, or rivalship, with considerable
saving in the aggregate of time, trouble, and expence, with more accuracy
in the calculations relative to its funds, and consequently with the
utmost practicable extension of its dividends.


FOOTNOTES:

[34] [Pope’s _Essay on Criticism_, pt. iii.]

[35] See Adam Smith’s _Wealth of Nations_, bk. i. ch. 10. pt. 1.

[36] [“Ideoque [conjicio], cum par scientia sit, utiliorem tamen
medicum esse amicum, quam extraneum.” Cels. _De Medic._ i. præf.]

[37] [Of these Societies (besides several whose benefits are confined
to certain counties and districts,) there are in England the four
following:—1. “Society for Relief of Widows and Orphans of Medical Men
in London and its Vicinity,” instituted in 1788; 2. “Medical Benevolent
Society, for the Relief of its distressed Members,” instituted in 1816;
3. “Benevolent Fund of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association,”
instituted in 1836, for the relief of distressed Medical Men, and their
widows and orphans; and 4. “General Medical Annuity Fund,” instituted in
1845, for the relief of distressed members, and their widows and orphans.]




CHAPTER IV.[38]

_Of Professional Duties in certain Cases which require a Knowledge of
Law._


§ 1. Gentlemen of the Faculty of Physic, by the authority of different
parliamentary statutes, enjoy an exemption from serving on inquests or
juries, from bearing armour, from being constables or church-wardens,
and from all burdensome offices, whether leet or parochial[39]. These
privileges are founded on reasons highly honourable to Medical men, and
should operate as incentives to that diligent and assiduous discharge
of professional duty, which the legislature has generously presumed to
occupy the time and to employ the talents of Physicians and Surgeons,
in some of the most important interests of their fellow-citizens. It
is perhaps on account of their being thus excused from many civil
functions, that Sir William Blackstone, in his learned “Commentaries,”
judges the study of the law to be less essential to them, than to any
other class of men. He observes, that “there is no special reason why
gentlemen of the Faculty of Physic should apply themselves to the study
of the law, unless in common with other gentlemen, and to complete the
character of general and extensive knowledge; a character which their
profession, beyond others, has remarkably deserved[40].” But I apprehend
it will be found that Physicians and Surgeons are often called upon to
exercise appropriate duties, which require not only a knowledge of the
principles of jurisprudence, but of the forms and regulations adopted in
our courts of judicature. The truth of this observation will sufficiently
appear from the following brief detail of some of the principal cases, in
which the science of law is of importance to Medical practitioners. To
enter at large on so comprehensive a subject, would far exceed the bounds
of the present undertaking.

§ 2.[41] When a Physician attends upon a patient, under circumstances
of imminent danger, his counsel may be required about the expediency of
a last will and testament. It behoves him therefore to know, whether,
in case of intestacy, the daughters or younger children of the sick
person would be legally entitled to any share of his fortune; whether the
fortune would be equally divided, when such equality would be improper
or unjust; whether diversity of claims and expensive litigations would
ensue, without a will, from the nature of the property in question; and
whether the creditors of the defunct would by his neglect be defrauded of
their equitable claims. For it is a culpable deficiency in our laws, that
real estates are not subject to the payment of debts by simple contract,
unless expressly charged with them by the last will and testament of
the proprietor[42]; although credit is often founded, as Dr. Paley well
observes, on the possession of such estates. This acute moralist adds,
“He, therefore, who neglects to make the necessary appointments for the
payment of his debts, as far as his effects extend, sins in his grave;
and, if he omits this on purpose to defeat the demands of his creditors,
he dies with a deliberate fraud in his heart[43].”

Property is divided by the law into two species, personal and real; each
requiring appropriate modes of transfer or alienation, with which a
Physician should be well acquainted. It may also be required of him to
deliver an opinion, and even a solemn judicial evidence, concerning the
capacity of his patient to make a will, a point sometimes of difficult
and nice decision; for various disorders obscure, without perverting,
the intellectual faculties; and even in delirium itself there are lucid
intervals, when the memory and judgement become sufficiently clear,
accurate, and vigorous, for the valid execution of a testament. In such
cases the will should commence with the signature of the testator,
concluding with it also, if his hand be not, after continued mental
exertions, too tremulous for subscription; and it should be made with all
possible conciseness and expedition[44].

If the patient be surprised by sudden and violent sickness, the law
authorizes a _nuncupative will_ in the disposal of personalty[45]. But,
to guard against fraud, the testamentary words must be delivered with an
explicit intention to bequeath; the will must be made at home, or among
the testator’s family or friends, unless by unavoidable accident; and
also in his last sickness,—for, if he recover, it is evident that time is
given for a written will[46].

The law excludes from the privilege of making a will madmen, idiots,
persons in their dotage, or those who have stupified their understandings
by drunkenness. But there is a high degree of hypochondriacism, which
not unfrequently falls under the cognizance of a Physician, and on which
he may be required to decide whether it amounts to mental incapacity
for the execution of a last will and testament. To define the precise
boundaries of rationality is perhaps impossible; if it be true, according
to Shakespear[47], that

    “The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
    Are of imagination all compact.”

But a partially distempered fancy is known to subsist with general
intelligence; and a man, like Mr. Simon Browne, believing the extinction
of his rational soul by the judgement of GOD, may uniformly evince in
every other instance very distinguished intellectual powers, and be
capable of directing his concerns and disposing of his property with
sufficient discretion. To preclude one so affected from being a testator,
seems inconsistent either with wisdom or justice; especially if the
will which has been made, discover in its essential parts no traces
of a disturbed imagination or unsound judgement. But, whenever false
ideas of a practical kind are so firmly united as to be constantly and
invariably mistaken for truth, we properly denominate this unnatural
alliance _Insanity_; and, if it give rise to a train of subordinate
wrong associations, producing incongruity of behaviour, incapacity for
the common duties of life, or unconscious deviations from morality and
religion, _Madness_ has then its commencement[48].

§ 3. A lunatic, or _non compos mentis_, in the eye of the law, is one
who has had understanding, but has lost it by disease, grief, or other
accident. The king is the trustee for such unfortunate persons, appointed
to protect their property, and to account to them, if they recover, for
their revenues; or, after their decease, to their representatives. The
Lord Chancellor, therefore, grants a commission to enquire into the
state of mind of the insane person; and if he be found _non compos_
by a jury, he usually commits the care of his person, with a suitable
allowance for his maintenance, to some friend, who is then called his
Committee[49]. The Physician who has been consulted about the case will
doubtless be called upon to deliver an opinion concerning his patient;
and, before he becomes accessory to his deprivation, as it were, of all
legal existence, he will weigh attentively the whole circumstances of
the disorder, the original cause of it, the degree in which it subsists,
its duration, and probable continuance. For, if the malady be not fixed,
great, and permanent, this solemn act of law must be deemed inexpedient,
because it cannot be reversed without difficulty; and when insanity has
been once formally declared, there may be grounds of apprehension that
the party will be consigned to neglect and oblivion. With regard to the
waste or alienation of property by the person thus afflicted, little risk
is incurred, if he be put under the ordinary restraint of a judicious
curator; for, whilst his mind remains in the state of alienation, he is
incapable of executing any act with validity; and the next heir, or other
person interested, may set it aside, on the plea of his incapacity. But
the use of a guardian or committee of a lunatic is chiefly to renew, in
his right, under the direction of the court of chancery, any lease for
lives or years, and to apply the profits for the benefit of the insane
person, of his heirs, or executors.

§ 4. The law justifies the beating of a lunatic, in such manner as the
circumstances may require[50]. But it has been before remarked[51], that
a Physician who attends an asylum for insanity is under an obligation
of honour as well as of humanity, to secure to the unhappy sufferers
committed to his charge all the tenderness and indulgence compatible with
steady and effectual government; and the strait waistcoat, with other
improvements in modern practice, now preclude the necessity of coercion
by corporal punishment[52].

§ 5[53]. Houses for the reception of lunatics are subject to strict
regulations of law. These regulations refer to the persons keeping such
houses, to the admission of patients into them, and to their inspection
by visitors, duly authorized and qualified. If any one conceal more
than a single lunatic without a licence, he becomes liable to a penalty
of five hundred pounds. The licences in the cities of London and
Westminster, or within seven miles of the metropolis, are granted by the
College of Physicians; who are empowered to elect five of their fellows
to act as commissioners for inspecting the lunatic asylums, within their
jurisdiction. Houses for the reception of lunatics in the country are to
be licensed by the justices of the peace during their quarter-sessions:
and at the time when the licence is granted the magistrates are directed
to nominate two of their own body, and also one Physician, to visit
and inspect such licensed houses. This inspection they are empowered
to make as often as they judge it to be expedient; and an allowance is
to be granted for the expences incurred. The keeper of every licensed
house is bound, under the penalty of one hundred pounds, not to admit or
confine any person as a lunatic, without having a certificate in writing,
under the hand and seal of some Physician, Surgeon, or Apothecary, that
such person is proper to be received into the house, as being _non
compos mentis_. And he is further required, under the same penalty, to
give notice of this certificate to the secretary of the commissioners,
appointed either by the College of Physicians, or the magistrates at
their quarter-sessions. The Act of Parliament which establishes these
regulations states this important proviso, “That in all proceedings
that shall be had under his Majesty’s writ of _Habeas Corpus_, and in
all indictments, informations, and actions, that shall be preferred and
brought against any person or persons, for confining or ill-treating
any of his Majesty’s subjects, in any of the said houses, the parties
complained of shall be obliged to justify their proceedings, according to
the course of the common law, in the same manner as if this Act had not
been made[54].”

The legal allowance to a Medical commissioner, for the visitation and
inspection of a lunatic-asylum, is fixed by the statute at one guinea.
This gratuity, which cannot be regarded as a just compensation for the
time and trouble bestowed, it may often be proper to decline; for to
a Physician of a liberal mind an inadequate pecuniary acknowledgement
is felt as a degradation, but he will be amply remunerated by the
consciousness of having performed an office, enjoined at once by the laws
of humanity, and of his country.

§ 6. In the case of sudden death, the law has made provision for
examining into the cause of it by the Coroner, an officer appointed for
the purpose, who is empowered to summon such evidence as is necessary
for the discharge of his inquisitorial and judicial functions. On these
occasions the attendance of a Physician or Surgeon may often be required,
who should be qualified to give testimony consonant to legal, as well
as to medical knowledge. To this end he must not only be acquainted
with the signs of natural death, but also of those which occur when it
is produced by accident or violence. And he should not be a stranger
to the several distinctions of homicide, established in our courts of
judicature; for the division of this act into _justifiable_, _excusable_,
and _felonious_, will aid his investigation, and give precision to the
opinion which he delivers.

§ 7. When a crime, which the law has adjudged to be capital, is attempted
to be committed by force, the resistance of such force, even so as to
occasion the death of the offender, is deemed _justifiable homicide_.
Mr. Locke carries this doctrine to a much greater extent; asserting,
that all manner of force, without a right, upon a man’s person, puts
him in a state of war with the aggressor, and of consequence, being in
such a state of war, he may lawfully kill him that puts him under this
unnatural restraint[55]. But Judge Blackstone considers this conclusion
as applicable only to a state of uncivilized nature; and observes, that
“the law of England is too tender of the public peace, too careful of the
lives of the subjects, to adopt so contentious a system; nor will suffer
with impunity any crime to be _prevented_ by death, unless the same, if
committed, would also be _punished_ by death[56].”

§ 8. With cases of justifiable homicide, however, gentlemen of the
Faculty are seldom likely to be professionally concerned. But _excusable_
homicide may frequently fall under their cognizance, and require their
deliberate attention and accurate investigation. It is of two sorts;
either _per infortunium_, by misadventure; or _se defendendo_, upon
a principle of self-preservation. Death may be the consequence of a
lawful act, done without any intention of hurt. Thus, if an officer,
in the correction of a soldier, happen to occasion his death, it is
only misadventure; the punishment being lawful. But if the correction
be unwarrantably severe, either in the manner, the instrument, or the
duration of punishment, and death ensue, the offender is at least
guilty of manslaughter, and in some circumstances, of murder. A Surgeon
therefore is usually present when soldiers are chastised with the lash
in pursuance of the sentence of a court-martial; and on his testimony
must depend the justification of the mode and degree of punishment
inflicted.—When medicines administered to a sick patient, with an honest
design, to produce the alleviation of his pain or cure of his disease,
occasion death, this is misadventure, in the view of the law; and the
Physician or Surgeon who directed them is not liable to punishment
criminally, though a civil action might formally lie for neglect or
ignorance. But it hath been holden that such immunity is confined to
_regular_ Physicians and Surgeons. Sir Matthew Hale, however, justly
questions the legality of this determination, since physic and salves
were in use before licensed Physicians and Surgeons. “Wherefore he treats
the doctrine as apocryphal, and fitted only to qualify and flatter
Licenciates and Doctors in Physic; though it may be of use to make
people cautious how they meddle too much in so dangerous an employment.”
The College of Physicians, however, within their jurisdiction, which
extends seven miles round London, are vested by charter with the power
of fine and imprisonment _pro mala praxi_[57]. Yet Dr. Groenevelt, who
was cited in the year 1693 before the Censors of the College[58], and
committed to Newgate by a warrant from the President for prescribing
cantharides in substance, was acquitted on the plea that bad practice
must be accompanied with a bad intention, to render it criminal. This
prosecution, whilst it ruined the doctor’s reputation and injured his
fortune, so that he is said to have died in want, excited general
attention to the remedy, and afterwards established the use of it; though
it must be acknowledged that his doses were too bold and hazardous. But,
whatever be the indulgence of the law towards Medical practitioners, they
are bound by a higher authority than that of the most solemn statute,
not to exercise the healing art without due knowledge, tenderness, and
discretion; and every rash experiment, every mistake originating from
gross inattention, or from that ignorance which necessarily results from
defective education, is, in the eye of conscience, a crime both against
GOD and man.

It must frequently devolve on the Faculty to decide concerning the nature
and effects of blows, strokes, or wounds inflicted, and how far the death
of the sufferer is to be ascribed to them, or to some antecedent or
subsequent disease. In homicide, also, _se defendendo_, the manner and
time of the defence are to be considered; for, if the person assaulted
fall upon the aggressor when the fray is over and he is running away,
this is revenge, and not defence; and, though no witness were present,
the situation of the wound or of the blow would afford, if in the back
of the assailant, presumptive evidence of felonious homicide.

§ 9. This crime, which in atrocity exceeds every other, is considered by
the law under the three heads of _suicide_, _manslaughter_, and _murder_,
concerning each of which the Faculty are occasionally obliged to give
professional evidence. A _felo de se_ is one who has deliberately put
an end to his existence, or committed any unlawful malicious act, the
immediate consequence of which proved death to himself. To constitute
this act a crime, the party must have been of years of discretion, and
in the possession of reason. A Physician, therefore, may be called
upon by the coroner to state his opinion of the mental capacity of the
defunct. And the law will not authorize the plea, that every melancholic
or hypochondriac fit deprives a man of the power of discerning right
from wrong. Even if a lunatic kill himself in a lucid interval, Sir
Matthew Hale affirms that he is a _felo de se_.—And the Physician who
has attended him is best qualified to judge of the degree, the duration,
or periodical seasons, of such returns of sanity. But there are cases
of temporary distraction, when death may be rushed upon apparently with
design, but really from the influence of terror, or the want of that
presence of mind which is necessary to the exercise of judgement and the
discrimination of actual from imaginary evil. Of this kind the reader
will find an affecting instance related by Dr. Hunter in the “Medical
Observations and Inquiries,” published by “a Society of Physicians in
London[59].”

§ 10. _Manslaughter_ is defined “the unlawful killing of another without
malice either express or implied; which may be either voluntarily, upon
a sudden heat; or involuntarily, but in the commission of some unlawful
act.” Yet, though this definition is delivered from Sir Matthew Hale, by
the excellent Commentator on the Laws of England so often quoted[60], it
is not sufficiently precise and comprehensive. For, when a person does an
act lawful in itself, but which proves fatal to a fellow-citizen, because
done without due circumspection, it may, according to circumstances, be
either misadventure, manslaughter, or murder. Thus, when a workman kills
any one by flinging down a stone or piece of timber into the street, if
the accident be in a country village, where there are few passengers, and
if he give warning by calling out to them, it is only _misadventure_;
but if it be in London, or any other populous town, where persons are
continually passing, it is _manslaughter_, though warning be loudly
given; and it is _murder_, if he know of their passing, and yet gives no
warning; for this is malice against all mankind[61].

On the like grounds we may reason concerning the cases of death
occasioned by drugs designed to produce abortion. This purpose is not
always unlawful; for the configuration of the pelvis in some females
is such as to render the birth of a full-grown child impossible, or
inevitably fatal. But even in such instances the guilt of manslaughter
may be incurred by ignorance of the drastic quality of the medicine
prescribed, or want of due caution in the dose administered; and, when
no moral or salutary end is in view, the simple act itself, if fatal in
the issue, falls under the denomination of murder[62]. “If a woman be
quick with child, and, by a potion or otherwise, killeth it in her womb,
this is a great misprision, yet no murder; but if the child be born
alive, and dieth of the potion or other cause, this is murder[63].” The
procuring of abortions was common amongst the Romans; and, it is said,
was liable to no penalty before the reigns of Severus and Antoninus.
Even those princes made it criminal only in the case of a married woman
practising it to defraud her husband of the comforts of children, from
motives of resentment; for, the foetus being regarded as a portion of
the womb of the mother, she was supposed to have an equal and full right
over both. This false opinion may have its influence in modern, as well
as in ancient, times; and false it must be deemed, since no female can
be privileged to injure her own bowels, much less the foetus, which is
now well known to constitute no part of them. To extinguish the first
spark of life is a crime of the same nature, both against our Maker and
society, as to destroy an infant, a child, or a man; these regular and
successive stages of existence being the ordinances of GOD, subject alone
to His Divine will, and appointed by Sovereign Wisdom and Goodness as the
exclusive means of preserving the race, and multiplying the enjoyments
of mankind. Hence the Father of Physic, in the Oath enjoined on his
pupils, (which some Universities now impose on the candidates for Medical
degrees,) obliged them solemnly to abjure the practice of administering
the πεσσὸς φθόριος[64]. But, in weighing the charge against any person
of having procured abortion, the methods employed should be attentively
considered by the Faculty; as this effect has often been ascribed to
causes inadequate to its production. Even the pessary, so sanctimoniously
forbidden by Hippocrates, has little of that activity and power which
superstition assigned to it.

§ 11. The law of England guards with assiduous care the lives of infants,
when endangered by motives which counteract, and too often overbalance,
the strong operation of maternal love. In cases of bastardy, therefore,
it is declared, by a statute passed in the reign of James the First,
that, “If any woman be delivered of any issue of her body, male or
female, which, being born alive, should by the laws of this realm be
a bastard, and she endeavour privately, either by drowning, or secret
burying thereof, or any other way, either by herself, or the procuring of
others, so to conceal the death thereof, as that it may not come to light
whether it was born alive or not, but be concealed, she shall suffer
death, as in case of murder, except she can prove, by one witness at
least, that the child was born dead[65].” This law, though humane in its
principle, is much too severe in its construction[66]. To give certainty
to punishment, by facilitating conviction, is doubtless an essential
object of jurisprudence; and it has been well observed, that the statute
which made the possession of the implements of coining a capital offence,
by constituting such possession complete evidence of guilt, has proved
the most effectual mean of enforcing the denunciation of law against
this dangerous and tempting crime[67]. But the analogy which the able
moralist has drawn between this ordinance and that relating to bastardy,
is not fully conclusive. For possession, in the former case, clearly
implies a specific purpose, for which the legislature with sufficient
wisdom and justice has provided a specific punishment. Whereas secrecy
in the mother, concerning the death of her illegitimate offspring,
hardly amounts to the lowest degree of presumptive evidence of felonious
homicide. Gentlemen of the Faculty have often melancholy experience of
the distraction and misery which females suffer under these unhappy
circumstances; and, when it becomes their painful office to deliver
evidence on such occasions, justice and humanity require that they should
scrutinize the whole truth, and

              “nothing extenuate,
    Nor set down aught in malice[68].”

“What is commonly understood to be the murder of a bastard child by the
mother,” says Dr. Hunter, “if the real circumstances were fully known,
would be allowed to be a very different crime in different circumstances.
In some (it is to be hoped _rare_,) instances, it is a crime of the very
deepest dye.... But, as well as I can judge, the greatest number of what
are called murders of bastard children, are of a very different kind.
The mother has an unconquerable sense of shame, and pants after the
preservation of character: so far she is virtuous and amiable. She has
not the resolution to meet and avow infamy. In proportion as she loses
the hope either of having been mistaken with regard to pregnancy, or of
being relieved from her terrors by a fortunate miscarriage, she every
day sees her danger greater and nearer, and her mind more overwhelmed
with terror and despair. In this situation many of these women, who are
afterwards accused of murder, would destroy themselves, if they did not
know that such an action would infallibly lead to an enquiry, which would
proclaim what they are so anxious to conceal. In this perplexity, and
meaning nothing less than the murder of the infant, they are meditating
different schemes for concealing the birth of the child; but are wavering
between difficulties on all sides, putting the evil hour off, and
trusting too much to chance and fortune. In that state often they are
overtaken sooner than they expected; their schemes are frustrated; their
distress of body and mind deprives them of all judgement and rational
conduct; they are delivered by themselves, wherever they happened to
retire in their fright and confusion; sometimes dying in the agonies of
child-birth, and sometimes being quite exhausted they faint away and
become insensible of what is passing, and, when they recover a little
strength, find that the child, whether still-born or not, is completely
lifeless. In such a case, is it to be expected, when it could answer
no purpose, that a woman should divulge the secret? Will not the best
dispositions of mind urge her to preserve her character? She will
therefore hide every appearance of what has happened as well as she
can; though, if the discovery be made, that conduct will be set down as
a proof of her guilt.... Here let us suppose a case, which every body
will allow to be very possible. An unmarried woman, becoming pregnant,
is striving to conceal her shame, and laying the best scheme that she
can devise for saving her own life and that of the child, and at the
same time concealing the secret; but her plan is at once disconcerted by
her being unexpectedly and suddenly taken ill by herself, and delivered
of a dead child. If the law punishes such a woman with death for not
publishing her shame, does it not require more from human nature, than
weak human nature can bear? In a case so circumstanced, surely the only
crime is the having been pregnant, which the law does not mean to punish
with death; and the attempt to conceal it by fair means should not be
punishable by death, as that attempt seems to arise from a principle of
virtuous shame[69].”

The observations here quoted have a just claim to attention from the
extensive experience which the author possessed, and still more from
his intimate knowledge of the female character. Yet to the moral and
political philosopher, Dr. Hunter may appear to have exalted the
sense of shame into the principle of virtue; and to have mistaken the
great end of penal law, which is not vengeance, but the prevention of
crimes. The statute, indeed, which makes the concealment of the birth
of a bastard child full proof of murder, confounds all distinctions of
innocence and guilt; as such concealment, whenever practicable, would
be the wish and act of all mothers, amiable or vicious, under the same
unhappy predicament. Law, however, which is the guardian and bulwark
of the public weal, must maintain a steady, and even rigid, watch,
over the general tendencies of human actions: and, when these are not
only clearly understood, but interpreted according to the rules of
wisdom and rectitude, that may justly be constituted a civil crime,
which, if permitted, might give occasion to atrocious guilt, though in
its own nature innocent. The measure of punishment, however, should be
proportionate, as nearly as possible, to the temptation to offend, and
to the kind and degree of evil produced by the offence. If inadequate
to the former, it will be nugatory; and if too severe for the latter,
it will defeat itself, by furnishing a just plea for superseding its
execution[70]. A revision of our sanguinary statutes is much wanted[71];
and it would be happy if means could be devised of suppressing the
punishment, by obviating the crime, when it is merely positive or
municipal. This we have seen accomplished with respect to the coinage of
money, by the simple introduction of a standard weight in the payment
of gold. And a sagacious legislator might doubtless discover and adopt
similar improvements in other branches of penal jurisprudence.

Much observation is required to discriminate between a child still-born,
and one that has lived after birth only a short space of time. Various
appearances, also, both internal and external, may be mistaken for
marks of violent death. Even the swimming of the lungs in water, a
test on which so much reliance is placed, will, on many occasions, be
found fallacious. But these are points of professional science, which
do not strictly fall under the subject of this section; and the reader
is particularly referred to the paper already quoted, and also to J.
F. Faselii “Elementa Medicinae Forensis [Regim. 4to. 1787.];” or to a
valuable epitome of the same work in English by Dr. Farr[72].

§ 12. Duelling is another species of felony, even though the consequences
of it should not prove fatal: and gentlemen of the Faculty are peculiarly
interested in the knowledge of the laws relating to it; because they are
not only liable to be summoned on the trial of the parties, if either or
both of them be wounded, but are frequently professional attendants on
them in the field of combat[73]. It is astonishing that a practice which
originated in ages of Gothic ignorance, superstition, and barbarism,
should be continued in the present enlightened period, though condemned
by the ordinances of every state, and repugnant to the spirit and
precepts of Christianity. Sir Francis Bacon, when Attorney-General,
in the reign of James I., delivered a Charge before the Court of
Star-Chamber touching duels, which gives a clear and animated view of the
light in which they were then regarded. “The first motive,” he says, “is
a false and erroneous imagination of honour and credit; and therefore
the King, in his last proclamation, doth most aptly and excellently
call them _bewitching duels_. For, if one judge of it truly, it is no
better than a sorcery, that enchanteth the spirits of young men that bear
great minds with a false shew, _species falsa_; and a kind of satanical
illusion and apparition of honour against religion, against law, and
against moral virtue.... Hereunto may be added, that men have almost lost
the true notion and understanding of fortitude and valour. For fortitude
distinguisheth of the grounds of quarrels whether they be just; and not
only so, but whether they be worthy; and setteth a better price upon
men’s lives than to bestow them idly. Nay, it is weakness and disesteem
of a man’s self, to put a man’s life upon such liedger[74] performances;
a man’s life is not to be trifled away; it is to be offered up and
sacrificed to honourable services, public merits, good causes, and noble
adventures. It is in expense of blood as it is in expense of money; it
is no liberality to make a profusion of money upon every vain occasion;
nor no more it is fortitude to make effusion of blood, except the cause
be of worth[75].”

The decree of the Star-Chamber against Priest and Wright, the objects of
Sir Francis Bacon’s Charge, was, that they should both be committed to
prison; that the former should be fined £500, and the latter 500 marks;
and that at the next assizes they should publicly acknowledge their high
contempt of, and offence against, GOD, the King’s majesty, and his laws,
shewing themselves penitent for the same.—Though this judgement appears
to have been founded in wisdom and equity, yet, happily for our country,
the court which passed the sentence has been long suppressed; and we
are now governed, not by arbitrary will, but by known and fixed laws.
Those which subsist against duelling, I shall quote on the authorities
of Foster, Blackstone, Hawkins and Burn. “Deliberate duelling, if death
ensueth, is in the eye of the law murder; for duels are generally
founded in deep revenge; and, though a person should be drawn into a
duel, not upon a motive so criminal, but merely upon the punctilio of
what the _swordsmen falsely call honour_, that will not excuse; for he
that deliberately seeketh the blood of another upon a private quarrel,
acteth in defiance of all laws human and divine, whatever his motive may
be[76].” “Express malice is when one, with a sedate deliberate mind and
formed design, doth kill another.... This takes in the case of deliberate
duelling, where both parties meet avowedly with an intent to murder;
thinking it their duty as gentlemen, and claiming it as their right, to
wanton with their own lives and those of their fellow-creatures, without
any warrant or authority from any power either divine or human, but in
direct contradiction to the laws both of GOD and man. And therefore the
law has justly fixed the crime and punishment of murder on them and on
their seconds also[77].” “The law so far abhors all duelling in cold
blood, that not only the principal who actually kills the other, but
also his seconds, are guilty of murder, whether they fought or not: and
it is holden, that the seconds of the party slain are likewise guilty
as accessaries[78].”—From variations in the moral and intellectual
character of man, it is impossible to ascertain the precise period when
the passions may be supposed to become cool, after having been violently
agitated. Judgement, therefore, must be founded on the circumstances of
deliberation which are delivered in the course of evidence. In many cases
it has been determined that death, in consequence of an appointment and
meeting a few hours subsequent to the provocation, is murder[79].

§ 13. Before a Surgeon engage professionally to attend a duellist to the
field of combat, it behoves him to consider well, not only how far he is
about to countenance a deliberate violation of the duties of morality and
religion; but whether, in the construction of law, he may not be deemed
an aider and abettor of a crime which involves in it such turpitude that
death is alike denounced against the principal and the accessary. Does
he not voluntarily put himself into a predicament, similar, in many
essential points, to that of the second, who is expressly condemned by
the legislature of this country? Both are apprized of the purpose to
commit an act of felony; both take an interest in the circumstances
attendant upon it; and both are present during the execution, the one to
regulate its antecedents, the other to alleviate its consequences. But I
suggest these considerations with much diffidence: and, though I observe
some passages in Sir Michael Foster’s “Discourse concerning Accomplices,”
which seem to confirm them, yet it may be proper to quote the following,
apparently adverse, opinion of this excellent judge. “In order to render
a person an accomplice and a principal in felony, he must be aiding and
abetting at the fact, or ready to afford assistance, if necessary: and
therefore if _A._ happeneth to be present at a murder, for instance, and
taketh no part in it, nor endeavoureth to prevent it, nor apprehendeth
the murderer, nor levieth hue and cry after him; this strange behaviour
of his, though highly criminal, will not of itself render him either
principal or accessary[80].”

But, whatever be the objections against the attendance of a Surgeon in
the field of combat, they cannot be construed to extend to the affording
of all possible assistance to any unfortunate sufferer in an affair of
honour; provided such assistance be not preconcerted, but required as
in ordinary accidents or emergencies. For in the offices of the healing
art no discrimination can be made either of occasions or of characters;
and it must be acknowledged, that many of the victims of duelling have
been men, from their talents and virtues, possessing the justest claim
to assiduous and tender attention. That lives of such inestimable value
to their friends, to their families, and to the public, should be at
the mercy of any profligate rake who wantonly gives affronts or idly
fancies he receives them, is a great aggravation of the folly, as well as
of the guilt, of duelling. This reflection seems to shew the propriety
of a change in the penal code respecting it; and that the punishment
inflicted should be confined to the aggressor; strict inquisition into
the circumstances of the case being previously made by the coroner, or
some magistrate authorized and bound to exercise this important trust.
And _he_ may with reason be regarded as the aggressor, who either
violates the rules of decorum by any unprovoked rudeness or insult,
or who converts into an offence what was intended only as convivial
pleasantry[81].

§ 14. A Physician has no special interest in an acquaintance with
the statutes relative to duelling; but, as he possesses the rank of
a gentleman, both by his liberal education and profession, the law
of honour (if that may be termed a _law_, which is indefinite and
arbitrary,) has a claim to his serious study and attention. As a
philosopher also it becomes him to trace its origin, and to investigate
the principles on which it is founded; and as a moralist duty calls
upon him to counteract its baneful influence and ascendancy: for in
principle it is distinct from virtue; and as a practical rule it extends
only to certain formalities and decorums, of little importance in the
transactions of life, and which are spontaneously observed by those who
are actuated with the true sense of propriety and rectitude. Genuine
honour in its full extent may be defined, a quick perception and strong
feeling of moral obligation, in conjunction with an acute sensibility to
shame, reproach, or infamy. In different characters these constituent
parts of the principle are found to exist in proportions so diversified,
as sometimes to appear almost single and detached. The former always
“aids and strengthens virtue:” the latter may occasionally “imitate
her actions[82],” when fashion happily countenances, or high example
prompts to, rectitude; but, being connected for the most part with a
jealous pride and capricious irritability, it will be more shocked with
the imputation, than with the commission, of what is wrong; and thus it
will constitute that spurious honour, which, by a perversion of the laws
of association, “puts evil for good and good for evil,” and, under the
sanction of a name, perpetrates crimes without remorse and even without
ignominy[83].

§ 15. Homicide by poison is another very important object of medical
jurisprudence. When it is the effect of inadvertency, or the want of
adequate caution in the use of substances dangerous to health and life,
the law regards it as a _misdemeanour_; when it is the consequence
of rashness, of wanton experiment, or of motives unjust though not
malicious[84], it becomes _manslaughter_; and when the express purpose
is to kill by means of some deleterious drug, it constitutes a most
atrocious species of _murder_. In cases of this nature the Faculty are
called upon to give evidence concerning the nature of the poison, the
symptoms produced by it, and the actual fatality of its operation. I
know not whether the period of this fatal operation be extended, as in
the infliction of blows and wounds, to a year and a day; but, if it be,
the most nice and accurate investigation of the progressive advances
of disease and death will be incumbent on the Physician or Surgeon
who is consulted on the occasion. No subject has given rise to more
misconception and superstition than the action of poisons. Numberless
substances have been classed as such, which, if not inert, are at least
innoxious; and powers have been ascribed to others, far exceeding their
real energy. Even Lord Verulam, the great luminary of science, in his
Charge against the Earl of Somerset for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury
in the tower of London, seems to give credit to the story of Livia, who
is said to have poisoned the figs upon the tree, which her husband was
wont to gather with his own hands; and he seriously states, that Weston
chased the poor prisoner “with poison after poison; poison in salts,
poison in meats, poison in sweet-meats, poison in medicines and vomits,
until at last his body was almost come, by use of poisons, to the state
that Mithridates’s[85] body was by the use of treacle and preservatives,
that the force of the poisons was blunted upon him: Weston confessing,
when he was chid for not dispatching him, that he had given him enough to
poison twenty men[86].” In this criminal transaction the truth probably
was (what has been judiciously suggested by Rapin,) that the lieutenant
of the Tower, refusing to be concerned in the crime, yet not daring to
discover it from the fear of the Viscount Rochester’s resentment, seized
the victuals sent from time to time for the prisoner, and threw them
into the house of office. Sir Thomas Overbury, however, fell a victim at
last to an empoisoned glyster.

When the particular drug, or other mean employed, can be accurately
ascertained, its deleterious qualities should be fully investigated; and
these should be cautiously compared with the effects ascribed to it in
the case under consideration. It may often be expedient also to examine
the body of the sufferer by dissection; and this should be accomplished
as expeditiously as possible, that the changes imputed to death may
not be confounded with those which are imputed to poison. But on such
points reference can alone be made to the knowledge and experience of
the practitioner, and to the lights which he may acquire by consulting
Faselius and other works of a similar nature. I shall, therefore, close
this article with a few passages of the charge of Mr. Justice Buller to
the grand jury, relative to the trial of Captain Donellan, for the murder
of Sir Theodosius Boughton, at the Warwick assizes, in March 1781. “In
this case, gentlemen,” he says, “you will have two objects to consider,
first, whether the deceased did die of _poison_? secondly, whether the
person suspected did assist in _administering_ the poison? With respect
to the first of these considerations, you will, no doubt, hear the
sentiments of those who are skilled in the nature and effects of poison,
which is of various sorts, and most subtile in its operation. From the
information of such persons you will be able to form an opinion upon
the effects which different poisons have on different persons; and also
of the effects the same poisons have on persons of different habits and
constitutions.... If you find he did get his death by poison, the next
case is, to consider who gave him that poison. Where poison is knowingly
given, and death ensues, it is wilful murder; and if one is present when
poison is given by another, he is not an accessary but a principal[87].”

§ 16. In all civilized countries the honour and chastity of the female
sex are guarded from violence by the severest sanctions of law: and this
protection is at once humane, just, and necessary to social morality.
It is consonant to humanity that weakness should be secured against
the attacks of brutal strength; it is just that the most sacred of all
personal property should be preserved from invasion; and it is essential
to morality that licentious passion should be restrained, that modesty
should not be wounded, nor the mind contaminated, in some instances,
before it is capable of forming adequate conceptions of right and
wrong. The crime of rape, therefore, subjects the perpetrator to condign
punishment by every code of jurisprudence, ancient or modern[88]. Amongst
the Jews death was inflicted, if the damsel was betrothed to another
man; and, if not betrothed, a fine amounting to fifty shekels of silver
was to be paid to her father by him who had “laid hold of the virgin,”
and she was to become his wife; and, “because he had humbled her, he
might not put her away all his days[89]:”—for the privilege of divorce
was authorized by the Jewish institutions. The Romans made this offence
capital, superadding the confiscation of goods. Even the carrying off a
woman from her parents or guardians, and cohabiting with her, whether
accomplished by force or with her full consent, were made equally penal
with a rape, by an imperial edict. For the Roman law seems to have
supposed, that women never deviate from virtue without being seduced
by the arts of the other sex; and, therefore, by imposing a powerful
restraint on the solicitations of men, they aimed at a more effectual
security of the chastity of women. “Nisi etenim eam solicitaverit,
nisi odiosis artibus circumvenerit, non faciet eam velle in tantum
dedecus sese prodere.” But the English law, as Judge Blackstone has
observed[90], does not entertain such sublime ideas of the honour of
either sex, as to lay the blame of a mutual fault on one only of the
transgressors; and it is therefore essential to the crime of rape, that
the woman’s will is violated by the execution. But, by a statute of Queen
Elizabeth, if the crime be perpetrated on a female child under the age of
ten years, the consent or non-consent is immaterial, as she is supposed
to be of insufficient judgement. Sir Matthew Hale is even of opinion,
that such profligacy committed on an infant under _twelve_ years, (the
age of female discretion by common law,) either with or without consent,
amounts to a rape and felony[91]. But the decisions of the courts have
generally been founded on the statute abovementioned.

A male infant under the age of fourteen years is deemed by the law
incapable of committing, and therefore cannot be found guilty of, a rape,
from a presumed imbecility both of body and mind. This detestable crime
being executed in secrecy, and the knowledge of it being confined to the
party injured, it is just that her single testimony should be adducible
in proof of the fact. Yet the excellent observation of Sir Matthew Hale
merits peculiar attention: “It is an accusation,” says he[92], “easily
to be made, and hard to be proved; and harder to be defended by the party
accused, though never so innocent.” He then relates two extraordinary
cases of malicious prosecution for this crime, which had fallen under
his own cognizance; and concludes, “I only mention these instances,
that we may be the more cautious upon trials of offences of this
nature, wherein the court and jury may, with so much ease, be imposed
upon, without great care and vigilance; the heinousness of the offence
many times transporting the judge and jury with so much indignation,
that they are over-hastily carried to the conviction of the person
accused thereof, by the confident testimony sometimes of malicious and
false witnesses.” Collateral and concurrent circumstances of time and
place[93], appearances of violence on examination, &c., are, therefore,
necessary to be added to the mere affirmative evidence of the prosecutor;
and the inspection of a Surgeon is often required, to ascertain the
reality of the alleged violence. On such occasions his testimony should
be given with all possible delicacy, as well as with the utmost caution.
Even external signs of injury may originate from disease, of which the
following examples, which have occurred in Manchester, are adduced on
very respectable authorities.

A girl about four years of age was admitted into the Manchester Infirmary
on account of a mortification in the female organs, attended with great
soreness, and general depression of strength. She had been in bed with a
boy fourteen years old, and there was reason to suspect that he had taken
criminal liberties with her. The mortification increased, and the child
died. The boy, therefore, was apprehended, and tried at the Lancaster
assizes; but was acquitted on sufficient evidence that several instances
of a similar disease had appeared, near the same period of time, in
which there was no possibility of injury or guilt. In one of these cases
the body was opened after death. The disorder had been a typhus fever,
accompanied with a mortification of the pudenda. There was no evident
cause of this extraordinary symptom discoverable on inspection. The
lumbar glands were of a dark colour; but all the viscera were sound.

§ 17. Concerning nuisances, the investigation and testimony of the
Faculty may be required, whenever they are of a nature offensive by the
vapours which they emit, and injurious to the health of individuals
or of the community. The law defines any thing that worketh hurt,
inconvenience, or damage, to be a nuisance[94]. Thus, if a person
keep hogs or other noisome animals so near the house of another that
the stench incommodes him and renders the air unwholesome, this is a
nuisance, because it deprives him of the enjoyments and benefits of his
habitation. A smelting house for lead, the smoke of which kills the grass
and corn, and injures the cattle of a neighbouring proprietor of land,
is deemed a nuisance. Dye-houses, tanning-yards, &c., are nuisances,
if erected so near a water-course as to corrupt the stream. But a
chandler’s factory, even when situated in a crowded town, is said to be
privileged from action or indictment, because candles are regarded as
necessaries of life. Hawkins, however, questions the authority of this
opinion, since the making of candles may be carried on in the country
without annoyance[95]. But this is scarcely practicable in a populous
neighbourhood; and, as Lord Mansfield has adjudged, that, in such cases,
what makes the enjoyment of being and property uncomfortable, is, in the
view of the law[96], a nuisance, various works and trades, essential
to the happiness and interest of the community, may fall under this
construction. But chemistry, mechanics, and other arts and sciences,
furnish methods of diminishing or obviating almost every species of
noisome vapour; and there can be no doubt that vitriol works, aqua-fortis
works, marine acid-bleaching works, the singeing of velvets, &c., may be
carried on with very little inconvenience to a neighbourhood, by means
neither difficult nor expensive. The same observation may be applied to
the business of the dyer, the fell-monger, the tanner, the butcher, and
the chandler; and, as these with many other disgustful trades are in some
degree necessary in large towns, justice and policy require that they
should only be prosecuted as nuisances, when not conducted in the least
offensive mode possible. To guard against arbitrary powers in municipal
government, and to render the decision and investigation of such points
perfectly consistent with the liberty of the subject, the reference
should be made to a jury; or at least, any individual should be allowed
an appeal to one, if he think himself aggrieved.

The frequency of fires in large manufacturing towns makes it expedient
that magistrates or commissioners should be authorized to scrutinize
rigidly into the causes of them when they occur, to punish neglect or
carelessness, as well as malicious intention, and to enforce suitable
measures of prevention. The plans proposed for this last very important
purpose by Mr. Hartley and Lord Stanhope have been proved to be
effectual, and are not expensive[97]. The adoption of them, therefore,
or of other means which may hereafter be discovered, should be required,
under a heavy penalty, in cases deemed by insurers _doubly hazardous_.

§ 18. It is a complaint made by coroners, magistrates, and judges, that
Medical gentlemen are often reluctant in the performance of the offices
required from them as citizens qualified by professional knowledge to aid
the execution of public justice. These offices, it must be confessed, are
generally painful, always inconvenient, and occasion an interruption to
business, of a nature not to be easily appreciated or compensated; but,
as they admit of no substitution, they are to be regarded as appropriate
debts to the community, which neither equity nor patriotism will allow to
be cancelled[98].

When a Physician or Surgeon is called to give evidence, he should avoid,
as much as possible, all obscure and technical terms, and the unnecessary
display of Medical erudition. He should deliver, also, what he advances,
in the purest and most delicate language consistent with the nature of
the subject in question.—When two or more gentlemen of the Faculty are
to offer their opinions or testimony, it would sometimes tend to obviate
contrariety, if they were to confer freely with each other, before
their public examination. Intelligent and honest men, fully acquainted
with their respective means of information, are much less likely to
differ, than when no communication has previously taken place. Several
years ago a trial of considerable consequence occurred relative to a
large copper work; and two Physicians of eminence were summoned to the
assizes, to bear testimony concerning the salubrity or insalubrity of the
smoke issuing from the furnaces. The evidence they offered was entirely
contradictory. One grounded his testimony on the general presumption
that the ores of copper contain arsenic; and consequently that the
effluvia proceeding from the roasting of them, must be poisonous because
arsenical. The other had made actual experiments on the ore employed
in the works under prosecution, and on the vapours which it yielded:
he was thus furnished with full proof that no arsenic was discoverable
in either. But the affirmative prevailed over the negative testimony,
from the authority of the Physician who delivered it; an authority
which he probably would not have misapplied, if he had been antecedently
acquainted with the decisive trials made by his opponent.

§ 19. It is the injunction of the law, sanctioned by the solemnity of
an oath, that in judicial testimony “the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth” shall be delivered. A witness, therefore, is
under a sacred obligation to use his best endeavours that his mind be
clear and collected, unawed by fear, and uninfluenced by favour or
enmity. But in criminal prosecutions, which affect the life of the person
accused, scruples will be apt to arise in one, who, by the advantages
of a liberal education, has been accustomed to serious reflection, yet
has paid no particular attention to the principles of political ethics.
It is incumbent, therefore, on gentlemen of the Faculty to settle their
opinions concerning the right of the civil magistrate to inflict capital
punishment, the moral and social ends of such punishment, the limits
prescribed to the exercise of the right, and the duty of a citizen to
give full efficiency to the laws.

The magistrate’s _right_ to inflict punishment, and the _ends_ of
such punishment, though intimately connected, are in their nature
distinct. The _right_ is clearly a substitution or transfer of that
which belongs to every individual by the law of nature, viz. instant
self-defence, and security from future violence or wrong. The _ends_
are more comprehensive, extending not only to complete security against
offence, but to the correction and improvement of the offender himself,
and to counteract in others the disposition to offend. Penal laws are
to be regulated by this standard; and the lenity or severity with which
they are executed, should, if possible, be exactly proportionate to it.
In different circumstances, either personal or public considerations
may preponderate; and in cases of great moral atrocity, or when the
common weal is essentially injured, all regard to the reformation of a
criminal is superseded, and his life is justly forfeited to the good of
society. In the participation of the benefits of the social union, he has
virtually acceded to its conditions; and the violation of its fundamental
articles renders him a rebel and an enemy, to be expelled or destroyed,
both for the sake of security, and as an awful warning to others. When
capital punishments are viewed in this light, the most humane and
scrupulous witness may consider himself as sacrificing private emotions
to public justice and social order; and that he is performing an act at
once beneficial to his country and to mankind. For political and moral
economy can subsist in no community, without the steady execution of wise
and salutary laws; and every atrocious act, perpetrated with impunity,
operates as a terror to the innocent, a snare to the unwary, and an
incentive to the flagitious. The criminal, also, who evades the sentence
of justice, like one infected with the pestilence, contaminates all whom
he approaches. He, therefore, who, from false tenderness or misguided
conscience, has prevented conviction by withholding the necessary
proofs[99], is an accessary to all the evils which ensue. The maxim, that
“it is better ten villains should be discharged than a single person
suffer by a wrong adjudication,” is one of those partial truths which are
generally misapplied, because not accurately understood. It is certainly
eligible that the rules and the forms of law should be so precise and
immutable, as not to involve the innocent in any decision obtained by
corruption, or dictated by passion and prejudice; though this should
sometimes furnish an outlet for the escape of actual offenders. The plea,
also, may have some validity in crimes of a nature chiefly political,
(with which, however, the Faculty can professionally have no concern,)
such as coining and forgery, or in cases wherein the punishment much
exceeds the evil or turpitude of the offence. For Lord Bacon has well
observed, that “over-great penalties, besides their acerbity, deaden the
execution of the law[100];” and, when they are discovered to be unjustly
inflicted, its authority is impaired, its sanctity dishonoured, and
veneration gives place to disgust and abhorrence.

But the dread of innocent blood being brought upon us by explicit and
honest testimony, is one of those superstitions, which the nurse has
taught, and which a liberal education ought to purge from the mind: and
if, in the performance of our duty, innocence should unfortunately be
involved in the punishment of guilt, we shall assuredly stand acquitted
before GOD and our own consciences. The convict himself, lamentable as
his fate must be regarded, may derive consolation from the reflection,
that, though his sentence be unjust, “he falls for his country, whilst
he suffers under the operation of those rules, by the general effect
and tendency of which the welfare of the community is maintained and
upholden[101].”

§ 20. When professional testimony is required in cases of such peculiar
malignity as to excite general horror and indignation, a virtuous mind,
even though scrupulous and timid, is liable to be influenced by too
violent impressions, and to transfer to the accused that dread and
aversion, which, before conviction, should be confined to the crime,
and as much as possible withheld from the supposed offender. If the
charge, for instance, be that of parricide, accomplished by poison,
and accompanied with deliberate malice, ingratitude, and cruelty; the
investigation should be made with calm and unbiassed precision, and
the testimony delivered with no colouring of passion, nor with any
deviation from the simplicity of truth. When circumstantial proofs are
adduced, they should be arranged in the most lucid order, that they may
be contrasted and compared in all their various relations with facility
and accuracy; and that their weight may be separately and collectively
determined in the balance of justice. For in such evidence there
subsists a regular gradation from the slightest presumption to complete
moral certainty; and, if the witness possess sufficient information in
this branch of philosophical and juridical science, he will always be
competent to secure himself, and, on many occasions, the court also, from
fallacy and error. The Marquis de Beccaria has laid down the following
excellent theorem concerning judicial evidence:—“When the proofs of a
crime are dependent on each other, (that is, when the evidence of each
witness, taken separately, proves nothing,) or when all the proofs are
dependent upon one, the number of proofs neither increases nor diminishes
the probability of the fact; for the force of the whole is no greater
than the force of that on which they depend; and, if this fails, they all
fall to the ground. When the proofs are independent of each other, the
probability of the fact increases in proportion to the number of proofs;
for the falsehood of one does not diminish the veracity of another....
The proofs of a crime may be divided into two classes, perfect and
imperfect. I call those _perfect_, which exclude the possibility of
innocence; _imperfect_, those which do not exclude this possibility. Of
the first, one only is sufficient for condemnation; of the second, as
many are required as form a perfect proof; that is to say, that, though
each of these, separately taken, does not exclude the possibility of
innocence, it is nevertheless excluded by their union[102].”


FOOTNOTES:

[38] [In this chapter there are numerous statements on different points
of law, which after the lapse of nearly half a century are no longer
accurate: these, where material, the Editor has endeavoured to correct,
chiefly by the assistance of Edward Herford Esq., Coroner of Manchester.]

[39] [See Willcock’s _Laws relating to the Medical Profession_.]

[40] Introd. § 1. vol. i. p. 13.

[41] [See Notes and Illustrations, No. X.]

[42] [This is no longer the case; as, by 3 & 4 Will. IV. c. 104, freehold
and copyhold estates in all cases are made assets for the payment of
simple contract as well as specialty debts.]

[43] _Moral and Political Philosophy_, bk. iii. pt. i. ch. 23.

[44] “In the construction of the statute 29 Car. II. c. 3. it has been
adjudged that the testator’s name, written with his own hand, at the
beginning of the will, as, ‘I, John Mills, do make this my last will and
testament,’ is a sufficient signing, without any name at the bottom;
though the other is the safer way.” See Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. ii.
ch. 23. vol. ii. p. 376. [This is no longer law.]

[45] [Nuncupative wills are now abolished, except in the case of sailors
and soldiers in actual service.]

[46] See Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. ii. ch. 32. vol. ii. p. 501.

[47] [_Midsummer Night’s Dream_, act v. sc. 1.]

[48] See the Author’s _Moral and Literary Dissertations_, p. 127 (or
_Works_, vol. ii. p. 82); also Notes and Illustrations, No. XI.

[49] Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. i. ch. 8. vol. i. p. 304.

[50] Hawkins, _Pleas of the Crown_, bk. i. ch. 60. § 23; Burn’s
_Justice_, vol. iii. p. 1288. (ed. 1845.)

[51] Ch. ii. § 30.

[52] [If Dr. Percival could say this in 1793, much more may _we_
thankfully repeat the statement in 1849.]

[53] [See Notes and Illustrations, No. XII.]

[54] See _Statutes at Large_, vol. viii. 14 Geo. III. c. 49. § 31; [also
9 Geo. IV. c. 40; 3 & 4 Will. IV. c. 36 & 64; 1 & 2 Vict. c. 14 & 64; 3 &
4 Vict. c. 54; 5 & 6 Vict. c. 87, and 7 & 8 Vict. c. 101. s. 27.]

[55] _Treatises of Government_, bk. ii. ch. 3. (_Works_, vol. iv. p. 347.)

[56] Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. iv. ch. 14. vol. iv. p. 181. [This
test, however, by the relaxation of the criminal law with respect to
rape, burglary, and some other crimes, is no longer applicable.]

[57] [See Willcock’s _Laws relating to the Medical Profession_, p. 91.]

[58] [See Groenevelt’s _Tutus Cantharidum in Medicina Usus Internus_,
præf.]

[59] Vol. vi. p. 279.

[60] [Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. iv. ch. 14. vol. iv. p. 190.]

[61] Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. iv. ch. 14. vol. iv. p. 191.

[62] See Burn’s _Justice_, vol. iii. p. 810. [By 7 Will. IV. and 1 Vict.
c. 85. the unlawfully administering any poison or other noxious thing,
or using any instrument or other means to procure miscarriage, is made
felony, punishable with transportation for life.]

[63] _Ibid._, vol. i. p. 10. (ed. 1845.)

[64] [Οὐδὲ γυναικὶ πεσσὸν φθόριον δώσω. Hippocr. _Jusjur._, tom. i. p. 2.
ed. Kühn.]

[65] Burn’s _Justice_, vol. i. p. 613. (ed. 1845.)

[66] [It has long been repealed; and the endeavour to conceal the birth
of a child is now a misdemeanour punishable with imprisonment.]

[67] See Paley’s _Moral and Political Philosophy_, bk. vi. ch. 9.

[68] [Shakespear’s _Othello_, act v. sc. 2.]

[69] _Medical Observations and Inquiries_, vol. vi. pp. 271, 286.

[70] “L’atrocité des lois en empêche l’exécution.—Lorsque la peine
est sans mesure, on est souvent obligé de lui préférer l’impunité.”
(Montesquieu.)

[71] [This has taken place, and the punishment of death is now inflicted
in comparatively few cases.]

[72] “Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, &c. &c. by Samuel Farr, M.D.”
3rd. ed. 12mo. Lond. 1815. [Or the more modern works of Beck, Christison,
Taylor, &c.]

[73] [See Notes and Illustrations, No. XIII.]

[74] Liedger, i. e. _slight_, _trifling_, from the French _leger_.

[75] Bacon’s _Works_, vol. iv. p. 401.

[76] Sir Michael Foster’s _Discourse of Homicide_, ch. 5. § 5. (in his
_Crown Law_, 8vo. p. 297.)

[77] Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. iv. ch. 14. vol. iv. p. 198.

[78] Hawkins, _Pleas of the Crown_, bk. i ch. 31. § 31; and Burn’s
_Justice_, vol. iii. p. 812. ed. 1845.

[79] See Legg’s case, in Kelyng’s _Reports_, p. 27; Eden’s _Principles of
Penal Law_, chap. 20. p. 224.

[80] Foster’s _Crown Law_, 8vo. p. 350.

[81] See Notes and Illustrations, No. XIV.

[82] Addison’s _Cato_, act ii. sc. 5.

[83] See the Author’s _Moral and Literary Dissertations_, p. 295. (or
_Works_, vol. ii. p. 203.)

[84] “If an action unlawful itself be done deliberately, and with
intention of mischief or great bodily harm to particulars, or of mischief
indiscriminately, fall it where it may, and death ensue against or beside
the original intention of the party, it will be murder. But if such
mischievous intention doth not appear, (which is matter of fact and to
be collected from circumstances,) and the act was done heedlessly and
incautiously, it will be manslaughter, not accidental death, because the
act upon which death ensued was unlawful.” (Foster’s _Crown Law_, p. 261.)

[85] [See Galen, _De Antid._ i. 1; _De Ther. ad Pis._ c. 16. tom. xiv.
pp. 3, 283.]

[86] Bacon’s _Works_, vol. iv. p. 481.

[87] _Hist. Sketches of Civil Liberty_, p. 209.

[88] See Notes and Illustrations, No. XV.

[89] Deut. xxii. 25, 28, 29.

[90] [_Comment._, bk. iv. ch. 15. vol. iv. p. 210.]

[91] [It is now created a misdemeanour by statute.]

[92] [_Hist. Placit. Coronae_, Pt. i. ch. 58. vol. i. p. 635.]

[93] These circumstances are particularly adverted to in the Mosaic Law.
See Deut. xxii. 25-27.

[94] See Blackstone’s _Comment._, bk. iii. ch. 13. vol. iii. p. 216 &c.;
and bk. iv. ch. 13. vol. iv. p. 161 (?)

[95] Hawkins, _Pleas of the Crown_, bk. i. ch. 75. § 10; Burn’s
_Justice_, vol. iii. p. 233 ed. 1845.

[96] Burrow’s _Reports_, p. 333; Burn, _ibid._

[97] [Mr. Hartley’s plan the Editor has not been able to find; that of
Lord Mahon (afterwards Earl Stanhope,) is contained in the _Philos.
Trans._ for 1778, p. 884. The titles of more recent works on the same
subject may be seen in Watt’s _Bibl. Brit._]

[98] [See Notes and Illustrations, No. XVI.]

[99] “The oath administered to the witness is, not only that what
he deposes shall be true, but that he shall also depose the _whole_
truth; so that he is not to conceal any part of what he knows, whether
interrogated particularly to that point or not.” Blackstone’s _Comment._,
bk. iii. ch. 23. vol. iii. p. 372.

[100] See _Proposal for Amending the Laws of England_. (_Works_, vol. iv.
p. 367.)

[101] Paley’s _Moral and Political Philosophy_, bk. vi. ch. 9.

[102] _Essay on Crimes and Punishments_, chap. 14.




NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.


NOTE I. Chap. i. § 31. p. 45.

_Caution or temerity in practice._

It is the observation of an elegant writer on the subject of morals, and
applicable to Medical practice, that “The best character is that which
is not swayed by temper of any kind; but alternately employs enterprise
and caution, as each is useful to the particular purpose intended. Such
is the excellence which St. Evremond ascribes to Mareschal Turenne,
who displayed every campaign, as he grew older, more temerity in his
military enterprises; and being now, from long experience, perfectly
acquainted with every incident in war, he advanced with greater firmness
and security, in a road so well known to him[103].” Yet it is said of
the great Duke of Marlborough, that ten years of such uninterrupted and
splendid success as no other general could boast of, never betrayed him
into a single rash action[104].

That boldness in Medical practice is more frequently the antecedent than
the consequence of experience, is a melancholy truth; for it is generally
founded either on theoretical dogmas, or on pride which disclaims
authority. To the consideration of Physicians who are thus prematurely
confident in their own powers, the remark of Lord Verulam[105] may be
recommended: “This is well to be weighed, that boldness is ever blind;
for it seeth not dangers and inconveniences: therefore it is ill in
counsel, good in execution: so that the right use of bold persons is,
that they never command in chief, but he seconds, and under the direction
of others. For in counsel it is good to see dangers, and in execution not
to see them, except they be very great.”


NOTE II. Chap. ii. § 2. p. 48.

_Temperance of Physicians._

“Though much has been said, and with some truth, of the good effects
of wine in producing rapidity and vivacity of thought, it has scarce
ever been pretended that it favoured the exercise of discrimination
and judgement. The only persons in whom it has ever been supposed not
to have the very opposite effects, are some gentlemen of the Faculty.
The ignorant vulgar would think _a priori_, that, _caeteris paribus_,
a Physician who was sober, would attend more accurately to the case of
his patient, and compare and distinguish all circumstances better, and
judge more soundly, and prescribe more rationally, than he could do
when he was drunk. But some Physicians, who should be supposed to know
themselves best, and who certainly must have known how they acquitted
themselves in those different situations, have boasted that they
prescribed as well drunk as sober. In this they could not be mistaken;
for, whether we consider the matter physically or logically, their boast
amounts precisely to this, that they prescribed no better when they were
sober than they did when they were drunk; which is undoubtedly a noble
accomplishment, but it is not surely either wonderful or rare[106].”

Tacitus, in his admirable treatise “De Situ, Moribus et Populis
Germaniae,” has stated, that those nations “de reconciliandis invicem
inimicis, et jungendis affinitatibus, et adsciscendis principibus, de
pace denique ac bello, plerumque in conviviis consultant: tamquam nullo
magis tempore aut ad simplices cogitationes pateat animus, aut ad magnas
incalescat. Gens non astuta nec callida, aperit adhuc secreta pectoris
licentia loci. Ergo detecta et nuda omnium mens postera die retractatur;
et salva utriusque temporis ratio est. Deliberant dum fingere nesciunt:
constituunt dum errare non possunt[107].” (c. 22.)

In deliberation it may on some peculiar occasions be of importance
to break off all former strong associations. A fit of drunkenness
accomplishes this fully: sleep has the same tendency, and hence the
proverb, “I will sleep upon it.” But such deliberation bears no analogy
to what is required from a Physician, when he is to consider the case of
a patient.

“Universal temperance,” says Mr. Gisborne[108], “both in eating and
drinking, is particularly incumbent on a Physician in every period of
his practice, not merely as being essentially requisite to preserve
his faculties in that alert and unclouded state which may render him
equally able at all times to pronounce on the cases which he is called
to inspect; but because it is a virtue which he will very frequently
find himself obliged to inculcate on his patients, and will inculcate on
them with little efficacy, if it be not regularly exemplified in his own
conduct.”


NOTE III. Chap. ii. § 3. p. 49.

_“A Physician should be the minister of hope and comfort to the sick.”_

Mr. Gisborne, in one of his interesting letters to me on the subject of
Medical Ethics, suggests, that it would be advisable to add, _as far
as truth and sincerity will admit_. “I know very well,” says he, “that
the sentence, as it now stands, conveys to you, and was meant by you to
convey to others, the same sentiment which it would express after the
proposed addition. But, if I am not mistaken in my idea that there are
few professional temptations to which Medical men are more liable (and
frequently from the very best principles,) than that of unintentionally
using language to the patient and his friends more encouraging than
sincerity would vindicate on cool reflection, it may be right
scrupulously to guard the avenues against such an error.”

In the “Enquiry into the Duties of Men,” the same excellent moralist thus
delivers his sentiments more at large[109]. “A professional writer[110],
speaking in a work already quoted[111] respecting the performance of
Surgical operations in hospitals, remarks, that it may be a salutary
as well as an humane act in the attending Physician, occasionally to
assure the patient that every thing goes on well, _if that declaration
can be made with truth_. This restriction, so properly applied to the
case in question, may with equal propriety be extended universally to
the conduct of a Physician, when superintending operations performed,
not by the hand of a Surgeon, but by Nature and Medicine. Humanity,
we admit, and the welfare of the sick man, commonly require that his
drooping spirits should be revived by every encouragement and hope which
can honestly be suggested to him. But truth and conscience forbid the
Physician to cheer him by giving promises, or raising expectations, which
are known or intended to be delusive. The Physician may not be bound,
unless expressly required, invariably to divulge at any specific time
his opinion concerning the uncertainty or danger of the case; but he is
invariably bound never to represent the uncertainty or danger as less
than he actually believes it to be; and whenever he conveys, directly
or indirectly, to the patient or to his family, any impression to that
effect, though he may be misled by mistaken tenderness, he is guilty of
positive falsehood. He is at liberty to say little; but let that little
be true. St. Paul’s direction, _not to do evil that good may come_[112],
is clear, positive, and universal.”

Whether this subject be viewed as regarding general morality, or
professional duty, it is of high importance; and we may justly presume
that it involves considerable difficulty and intricacy, because opposite
opinions have been advanced upon it by very distinguished writers. The
ancients, though sublime in the abstract representations of virtue, are
seldom precise and definite in the detail of rules for its observance.
Yet in some instances they extend their precepts to particular cases;
and Cicero, in the third book of his “Offices,” expressly admits of
limitations to the absolute and immutable obligation of fidelity and
truth. (cc. 24, 25.)

The maxim of the poet, also, may be adduced as intended to be
comprehensive of the moral laws, by which human conduct is to be
governed:—

            “Sunt certi denique fines,
    Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum[113].”

The early Fathers of the Christian Church, Origen, Clement, Tertullian,
Lactantius, Chrysostom, and various others, till the period of St.
Augustine, were latitudinarians on this point. But the holy father last
mentioned, if I mistake not, in the warmth of his zeal, declared that
he would not utter a lie, though he were assured of gaining Heaven by
it[114]. In this declaration there is a fallacy, by which Augustine
probably imposed upon himself: for a lie is always understood to consist
in a _criminal_ breach of truth, and therefore under no circumstances can
be justified. It is alleged, however, that falsehood may lose the essence
of lying, and become even praiseworthy, when the adherence to truth is
incompatible with the practice of some other virtue of still higher
obligation. This opinion almost the whole body of civilians adopt, with
full confidence of its rectitude. The sentiments of Grotius may be seen
at large in the satisfactory detail which he has given of the controversy
relating to it[115].

Puffendorff, who may be regarded as next to this great man in
succession as well as authority, delivers the following observations
in his “Law of Nature and Nations,” which are pointedly applicable to
the present subjects, yet carried assuredly to a very reprehensible
extent:—“Since those we talk to may often be in such circumstances,
that, if we should tell them the downright truth of the matter, it would
prejudice them, and would incapacitate us for procuring that lawful
end we propose to ourselves for their good; we may in these cases use
a fictitious or figurative way of speech, which shall not directly
represent to our hearers our real thoughts and intentions: for, when
a man is desirous, and it is his duty, to do a piece of service, he
is not bound to take measures that will certainly render his attempts
unsuccessful[116].”—“Those are by no means guilty of lying, who, for the
better information of children, or other persons not capable of relishing
the naked truth, entertain them with fictions and stories; nor those who
invent something that is false, for the sake of a good end, which by the
plain truth they could not have compassed; as, suppose, for protecting
an innocent, for appeasing a man in his passion, for _comforting the
afflicted_, for _animating the timorous_, for _persuading a nauseating
patient to take his physic_, for overcoming an obstinate humour, for
making an ill design miscarry[117].”

Several modern ethical writers of considerable celebrity have been
no less explicit and indulgent on this question. Amongst these it
may suffice to cite the testimony of the late Dr. Francis Hutcheson
of Glasgow; of whom it is said by his excellent biographer, that “he
abhorred the least appearance of deceit either in word or action[118].”
“When in certain affairs,” says he, “’tis known that men do not conceive
it an injury to be deceived, there is no crime in false speech about
such matters.... No man censures a Physician for deceiving a patient too
much dejected, by expressing good hopes of him, or by denying that he
gives him a proper medicine which he is foolishly prejudiced against:
the patient afterwards will not reproach him for it.... Wise men allow
this liberty to the Physician in whose skill and fidelity they trust: or
if they do not, there may be a just plea from necessity[119].”—“These
pleas of necessity some would exclude by a maxim of late received, _We
must not do evil that good may come of it._ The author of this maxim is
not well known. It seems, by a passage in St. Paul[120], that Christians
were reviled as teaching, that, since the mercy and veracity of God were
displayed by the obstinate wickedness of the Jews, they should continue
in sin that this good might ensue from it. He rejects the imputation upon
his doctrine; and hence some take up the contradictory proposition as
a general maxim of great importance in morality. Perhaps it has been a
maxim among St. Paul’s enemies, since they upbraid him with counteracting
it. Be the author who they please, the sentence is of no use in morals,
as it is quite vague and undetermined. Must one do nothing for a good
purpose, which would have been evil without this reference? ’Tis evil to
hazard life without a view to some good; but, when ’tis necessary for a
public interest, ’tis very lovely and honourable. ’Tis criminal to expose
a good man to danger for nothing; but ’tis just even to force him into
the greatest dangers for his country. ’Tis criminal to occasion any pains
to innocent persons, without a view to some good; but for restoring of
health we reward chirurgeons for scarifyings, burnings, and amputations.
‘But,’ say they, ‘such actions, done for these ends, are not evil. The
maxim only determines that we must not do, for a good end, such actions
as are evil even when done for a good end.’ But this proposition is
identic and useless; for who will tell us next, what these actions,
sometimes evil, are, which may be done for a good end? and what actions
are so evil that they must not be done even for a good end? The maxim
will not answer this question; and truly it amounts only to this trifle;
_you ought not for any good end to do what is evil, or what you ought not
to do, even for a good end_[121].”

Dr. Johnson, who admits of some exception to the law of truth,
strenuously denies the right of telling a lie to a sick man for fear of
alarming him. “You have no business with consequences,” says he; “you are
to tell the truth. Besides, you are not sure what effect your telling him
that he is in danger may have. It may bring his distemper to a crisis,
and that may cure him. Of all lying I have the greatest abhorrence of
this, because I believe it has been frequently practised on myself[122].”

If the Medical reader wishes to investigate this nice and important
subject of casuistry, he may consult Grotius _De Jure Belli ac Pacis_,
Puffendorff, Grove’s _Ethics_, Balguy’s _Law of Truth_, Fénelon’s
_Telemachus_, Butler, Hutcheson, Paley, and Gisborne. Every practitioner
must find himself occasionally in circumstances of very delicate
embarrassment, with respect to the contending obligations of veracity
and professional duty; and when such trials occur, it will behove him to
act on fixed principles of rectitude, derived from previous information
and serious reflection. Perhaps the following brief considerations, by
which I have conscientiously endeavoured to govern my own conduct, may
afford some aid to his decision.

Moral truth, in a professional view, has two references; one to the
party to whom it is delivered, and another to the individual by whom
it is uttered. In the first, it is a _relative_ duty, constituting a
branch of justice; and may be properly regulated by the Divine rule of
equity prescribed by our SAVIOUR, to do unto others, as we would (all
circumstances duly weighed,) they should do unto us[123]. In the second,
it is a _personal_ duty, regarding solely the sincerity, the purity,
and the probity of the Physician himself. To a patient, therefore,
(perhaps the father of a numerous family, or one whose life is of the
highest importance to the community,) who makes enquiries, which, if
faithfully answered, might prove fatal to him, it would be a gross and
unfeeling wrong to reveal the truth. His right to it is suspended, and
even annihilated; because, its beneficial nature being reversed, it would
be deeply injurious to himself, to his family, and to the public: and
he has the strongest claim, from the trust reposed in his Physician, as
well as from the common principles of humanity, to be guarded against
whatever would be detrimental to him. In such a situation, therefore,
the only point at issue is, whether the practitioner shall sacrifice
that delicate sense of veracity, which is so ornamental to, and indeed
forms a characteristic excellence of, the virtuous man, to this claim
of Professional justice and social duty. Under such a painful conflict
of obligations a wise and good man must be governed by those which are
the most imperious; and will therefore generously relinquish every
consideration referable only to himself. Let him be careful, however, not
to do this, but in cases of real emergency, which happily seldom occur;
and to guard his mind sedulously against the injury it may sustain by
such violations of the native love of truth.

I shall conclude this long note with the two following very interesting
biographical facts. The husband of the celebrated Arria, Caecina Paetus,
was very dangerously ill. Her son was also sick at the same time, and
died[124]. He was a youth of uncommon accomplishments, and fondly beloved
by his parents. Arria prepared and conducted his funeral in such a
manner, that her husband remained entirely ignorant of the mournful event
which occasioned that solemnity. Paetus often enquired with anxiety about
his son; to whom she cheerfully replied, that he had slept well, and was
better. But if her tears, too long restrained, were bursting forth, she
instantly retired, to give vent to her grief; and when again composed,
returned to Paetus with dry eyes and placid countenance, quitting, as
it were, all the tender feelings of the mother at the threshold of her
husband’s chamber.

“Lady Russell’s only son, Wriothesley, Duke of Bedford, died of the
small-pox in May 1711, in the 31st year of his age[125].... To this
affliction succeeded, in Nov. 1711, the loss of her daughter, the Duchess
of Rutland, who died in child-bed. Lady Russell, after seeing her in the
coffin, went to her other daughter, married to the Duke of Devonshire,
from whom it was necessary to conceal her grief, she being at that time
in child-bed likewise; therefore she assumed a cheerful air, and with
astonishing resolution, [verbally] agreeable to truth, answered her
anxious daughter’s enquiries with these words: ‘I have seen your sister
out of bed to-day.’”


NOTE IV. Chap. ii. § 5. p. 50.

“_The practice of a prior Physician should be treated with candour, and
justified, so far as truth and probity will permit._”

Montaigne in one of his “Essays” treats with great humour of Physic and
Physicians; and makes it a charge against them, that they perpetually
direct variations in each other’s prescriptions. “Who ever saw,” says
he, “one Physician approve of another’s prescription, without taking
something away, or adding something to it? By which they sufficiently
betray their art, and make it manifest to us that they therein more
consider their own reputation, and consequently their profit, than their
patients’ interest[126].”


NOTE V. Chap. ii. § 9. p. 53.

_Theoretical discussions should be generally avoided._

This rule is not only applicable to consultations, but to any reasonings
on the nature of the case and of the remedies prescribed, either with
the patient himself or his friends. It is said by my lamented friend Mr.
Seward in his entertaining “Anecdotes,” that the late Lord Mansfield gave
this advice to a military gentleman, who was appointed Governor of one
of our islands in the West Indies, and who expressed his apprehensions
of not being able to discharge his duty as chancellor of his province:
“Always decide, and never give reasons for your decision. You will in
general decide well; yet give very bad reasons for your judgement[127].”


NOTE VI. Chap. ii. § 11. p. 54.

_Regular academical education._

“It is the general opinion,” says Dr. Johnson[128], “that Sydenham was
made a physician by accident and necessity; and Sir Richard Blackmore
reports in plain terms[129], that he engaged in practice without any
preparatory study, or previous knowledge, of the Medicinal sciences; and
affirms, that, when he was consulted by him what books he should read to
qualify him for the said profession, he recommended _Don Quixote_. That
he recommended Don Quixote to Blackmore,” continues Dr. Johnson, “we
are not allowed to doubt; but the relater is hindered, by that self-love
which dazzles all mankind, from discovering that he might intend a satire
very different from a general censure of all the ancient and modern
writers on Medicine; since he might perhaps mean, either seriously or in
jest, to insinuate that Blackmore was not adapted by nature to the study
of Physic, and that, whether he should read Cervantes or Hippocrates, he
would be equally unqualified for practice, and equally unsuccessful in
it. Whatsoever was his meaning, nothing is more evident than that it was
a transient sally of an imagination warmed with gaiety, or the negligent
effusion of a mind intent upon some other employment, and in haste to
dismiss a troublesome intruder.” Sydenham himself has declared[130],
that, after he determined upon the profession of Physic, he applied in
earnest to it, and spent several years in the University of Oxford,
before he began to practise in London. He travelled afterwards to
Montpelier in quest of more information; “so far was he from any contempt
of academical institutions, and so far from thinking it reasonable to
learn Physic by experiments alone, which must necessarily be made at the
hazard of life[131].”

But it is highly injurious to the usefulness and honour of the
Profession, to suppose the education of a Physician may be confined to
the pursuit of Medicine as an _art_. Sir William Blackstone, in the
Introduction to his “Commentaries on the Laws of England[132],” has
reprobated the custom of placing the juridical student “at the desk of
some skilful attorney, in order to initiate him early in all the depths
of practice, and render him more dexterous in the mechanical part of
business.” This illiberal path to the bar is not to be sanctioned,
he observes, by a few particular instances of persons, who, through
the force of transcendent genius, have been able to overcome every
disadvantage. And he points out, in very forcible terms and with sound
argument, how essential it is to the lawyer to form his sentiments by
the perusal of the purest classical authors; to learn to reason with
precision, by the simple but clear rules of unsophisticated logic; to fix
the attention, and steadily to pursue truth through the most intricate
deductions, by an acquaintance with mathematical demonstration; and to
acquire enlarged conceptions of nature and of art, by a view of the
several branches of experimental philosophy. Now, if this be the _vantage
ground_, (to adopt the language of Lord Bacon,) from which the study of
the Law should commence, it ought to be deemed at least equally necessary
to qualify for the prosecution of Medicine—a science which has man, as
a compound of matter and mind, for its subject, and an infinitude of
substances derived from the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms for
its instruments. This sentiment seems to have been early prevalent in
the celebrated school of Physic, established at Salerno in Italy. For it
was enacted, A.D. 1237, by the heads of colleges there, that the pupils
should be bound to pass three years in the acquisition of philosophy, and
five subsequent years in that of Medicine[133]. The like regulations were
afterwards adopted in other Universities; but in various countries have
fallen into disuse.

On the first revival of learning in Europe, science was held in the
highest estimation; and the three faculties of Law, Physic, and Divinity
assumed particular honours and privileges. Academical degrees were
conferred on their members; and these titles, with the rank annexed
to them, were admitted _ubique gentium_; being, like the order of
knighthood, of universal validity. Doctors indeed contended sometimes
with knights for precedence, and the disputes were not unfrequently
terminated by advancing the former to the dignity of knighthood. It
was even asserted that a doctor had a right to that title without
creation[134].


NOTE VII. Chap. ii. § 15. p. 57.

_Pecuniary acknowledgements._

The following fact is applicable to the professional conduct of
Physicians towards their friends:—“When Addison was in office, [under
the earl of Wharton, as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,] he made a law to
himself, as Swift has recorded, never to remit his regular fees in
civility to his friends: ‘for,’ said he, ‘I may have a hundred friends;
and, if my fee be two guineas, I shall, by relinquishing my right, lose
two hundred guineas, and no friend gain more than two; there is therefore
no proportion between the good imparted, and the evil suffered[135].’” In
recording Mr. Addison’s _prudential_ conduct, his probity, with respect
to pecuniary acknowledgements, should not be unnoticed. In a letter,
relative to the case of Major Dunbar, he says:—“And now, Sir, believe
me, when I assure you, I never did, nor ever will, on any pretence
whatsoever, take more than the stated or customary fees of my office. I
might keep the contrary practice concealed from the world, were I capable
of it; but I could not from myself; and I hope I shall always fear the
reproaches of my own heart, more than those of all mankind[136].”

At a period when empirics and empiricism seem to have prevailed much in
Rome, the exorbitant demands of Medical practitioners, particularly for
certain secret compositions which they dispensed, induced the Emperor
Valentinian to ordain, that no individual of the Faculty should make an
express charge for his attendance on a patient, nor even avail himself
of any promise of remuneration during the period of sickness; but that
he should rest satisfied with the donative voluntarily offered at the
close of his ministration[137]. By the same law, however, the Emperor
provided that one practitioner, at least, should be appointed for each
of the fourteen sections into which the Roman metropolis was divided,
with special privileges, and a competent salary for his services; thus
indirectly, yet explicitly, acknowledging that a Physician has a full
claim in equity to his professional emoluments. Is it not reasonable,
therefore, to conclude, that what subsisted as a _moral_ right, ought
to have been demandable, under proper regulations, as a _legal_ right?
For it seems to be the office of law to recognise and enforce that which
natural justice recognises and sanctions.

The Roman advocates were subject to the like restrictions, and from a
similar cause; for their rapacity occasioned the revival of the Cincian
Law, “qua cavetur antiquitus, ne quis ob causam orandam pecuniam donumve
accipiat.” But Tacitus relates, that, when the subject was brought into
discussion before Claudius Caesar, amongst other arguments in favour
of receiving fees, it was forcibly urged, “sublatis studiorum pretiis,
etiam studia peritura;” and that, in consequence, the prince “capiendis
pecuniis posuit modum, usque ad dena sestertia, quem egressi repetundarum
tenerentur[138].”

A precise and invariable _modus_, however, would be injurious both to
the barrister and the Physician, because the fees of each ought to be
measured by the value of his time, the eminence of his character, and by
his general rule of practice. This rule, with its antecedents, being well
known, a _tacit compact_ is established, restrictive on the claims of
the practitioner, and binding on the probity of the patient. Law cannot
properly by its ordinances establish the custom, which will and ought
to vary in different situations and under different circumstances. But
a court of judicature, when formally appealed to, seems to be competent
to authorize it if just, and to correct it if unjust. Such decisions
could not wholly change the honorary nature of fees; because they would
continue to be increased at the discretion of the affluent, according to
their liberality and grateful sense of kind attentions; and diminished
at the option of the Physician to those who may from particular
circumstances require his beneficence.

From the Roman code the established usage in different countries of
Europe relative to Medical fees has probably originated. This usage,
which constitutes common law, seems to require considerable modification
to adapt it to the present state of the Profession. For the general
body of the Faculty, especially in the united kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, are held in very high estimation on account of their
liberality, learning, and integrity[139]; and it would be difficult to
assign a satisfactory reason why they should be excluded from judicial
protection, when the just remuneration of their services is wrongfully
withheld. Indeed a Medical practitioner (one especially who is settled
in a provincial town, or in the country,) may have accumulated claims
from long-protracted and often expensive attendance; and his pecuniary
acknowledgements may be refused from prejudice, from captiousness, from
parsimony, or from dishonesty. Under such circumstances considerations of
benevolence, humanity, and gratitude, are wholly set aside; because, when
disputes arise, they must be suspended or extinguished, and the question
at issue can alone be decided on the principles of _commutative justice_.


NOTE VIII. Chap. ii. § 30. p. 65.

_Public worship; scepticism and infidelity._

The neglect of social worship, with which Physicians have been too
justly charged, may be traced in many instances to the period of their
academical education, particularly in the Universities, where young
men are permitted to live at large, and are subject to no collegiate
discipline. Sunday, affording a recess from public lectures, is devoted
by those who are ardent in study to a review of the labours of the
past week, to preparations for Medical or scientific discussions
in the societies of which they are members, or to other pursuits,
belonging to their Profession, but unconnected with Religion. The
idle and the gay in such situations are eager to avail themselves of
opportunities so favourable to their taste for recreation, or to their
aversion to business and confinement. In each of these classes, though
actuated by different principles, there is much danger that devotional
impressions will be gradually impaired for want of stated exercise and
renewal; and a foundation will thus be laid for habitual and permanent
indifference in future life to Divine services, whenever Medical
avocations furnish a _salvo_ to the mind, and a plausible excuse to the
world, for non-attendance on them. This coldness of heart, this moral
insensibility, should be sedulously counteracted before it has acquired
an invincible ascendancy. No apology should be admitted for absence
from the stated offices of piety, but that of duties to be performed of
immediate and pressing necessity. When the church is entered with just
views, it will be found that there is a sympathy in religious homage,
which at once inspires and heightens devotion; and that to hold communion
with God in concert with our families, our friends, our neighbours,
and our fellow citizens, is the highest privilege of human nature.
But, with a full conviction of the obligation of public worship, as a
social institution founded on common consent, and enjoined by legal
authority; as a moral duty connecting us by the most endearing ties
with our brethren of mankind, who are joint dependants with ourselves
on the pardon, the protection, and the bounty of GOD; and as a debt of
general homage to our Creator, Benefactor, and Judge; yet there may
subsist in a devout and benevolent mind scruples respecting doctrines
and forms, sufficient to produce an alienation from the sacred offices
of the temple. Such doubts, when they originate from serious enquiry,
and are not the result of fastidiousness or arrogance, have a claim to
tenderness and indulgence; because to act in contradiction to them,
whilst they subsist, would be a violation of sincerity, amounting in some
cases to the guilt of hypocrisy. But in a country where private judgement
is happily under no restraint, and where so great a diversity of sects
prevails, it will be strange if a candid and well-informed man can find
no Christian denomination, with which he might accord in spirit and in
truth. Sir Thomas Brown, in the statement which he has given in his
“Religio Medici[140],” seems to have allowed himself on these points very
extensive latitude:—“We have reformed _from_ them, [viz. the Papists,]
not against them; ... and therefore I am not scrupulous to converse and
live with them, to enter their churches in defect of ours, and either
pray _with_ them or for them. I could never perceive ... that a resolved
conscience may not adore her Creator any where, especially in places
devoted to His service; where, if _their_ devotions offend Him, mine may
please Him; if theirs profane it, mine may hallow it.... I could never
hear the _Ave-Mary_ bell without an elevation, or think it a sufficient
warrant, because _they_ erred in one circumstance, for me to err in
all,—that is, in silence and dumb contempt: whilst therefore _they_
directed their devotions to _her_, I offered mine to GOD, and rectified
the errors of _their_ prayers by rightly ordering my own.”

But authority much more respectable than that of Sir Thomas Brown may be
adduced in favour of the spirit of catholicism in Christian communion.
Mr. Locke, a short time before his death, received the Sacrament
according to the rites of the Church of England, though it is evident
from his writings that he dissented from many of her doctrines. When
the office was finished, he told the minister, “that he was in the
sentiment of perfect charity towards all men, and of a sincere union
with the Church of CHRIST, under whatever name distinguished[141].”—Dr.
David Hartley was originally intended for the clerical profession, but
was prevented from going into holy orders by his scruples concerning
subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles. He continued, however, to the
end of his life, a well-affected member of the Establishment, approving
of its practical doctrines, and conforming to its public worship. He
was a Catholic Christian, says his son and biographer, in the most
extensive and literal sense of the term. On the subject of religious
controversy he has left the following testimony of his sentiments:—“The
great differences of opinion and contentions, which happen on religious
matters, are plainly owing to the violence of men’s passions more than
to any other cause. When Religion has had its due effect in restraining
these, and begetting true candour, we may expect a unity of opinion both
in religious and other matters, as far as is necessary for useful and
practicable purposes.”

These examples of the conduct of wise and conscientious Christians
evince, that, in their estimation, forms, ceremonies, and doctrines,
are of a moment subordinate to the benefits and obligations of social
worship. But they are not adduced to sanction an _indifference_, either
to religious rites, or religious truth. The mind will always be in the
best frame for holy exercises, when the modes by which they are conducted
are consonant to its sentiments of propriety and rectitude; and that
church should be habitually resorted to, if practicable, the public
services of which accord most satisfactorily with the views of the
individual, concerning the attributes of GOD, and the revelation of His
will and promises to man. No personal friendship, no party connection, no
professional interest should be allowed to predominate in the choice. For
genuine piety, which is the joint offspring of reason and of sentiment,
admits of no substitutions. It consists in a full conviction of the
understanding, accompanied with correspondent affections of the heart;
and in its exercises calls forth their united and noblest energies.

It will not be foreign to the subject of this note to investigate
briefly, the imputation of scepticism and infidelity, which has been laid
against the Medical Faculty. The Rev. Dr. Samuel Parr, whose candour is
unquestionable, and whose learning and genius entitle him to the highest
respect, has lately sanctioned it, as will appear by the following
passage from his “Remarks on the Statement of Dr. Charles Combe,”
(p. 82[142]):—“While I allow,” says he, “that peculiar and important
advantages arise from the appropriate studies of the three liberal
professions, I must confess, that in erudition, in science, and in habits
of deep and comprehensive thinking, the pre-eminence in some degree must
be assigned to Physicians. The propensity which some of them have shewn
to scepticism upon religious topics is indeed to be seriously lamented;
and it may be satisfactorily explained, I think, upon metaphysical
principles, which evince the strength rather than the weakness of
the human mind, when contemplating under certain circumstances the
multiplicity and energy of physical causes. But I often console myself
with reflecting on the sounder opinions of Sir Thomas Brown, Sydenham,
Boerhaave, and Hartley, in the days that are past: and of our own times
posterity will remember that they were adorned by the virtues, as well as
the talents, of a Gregory, a Heberden, a Falconer[143], &c.”

Mr. Gisborne, in his “Enquiry into the Duties of Men, in the Higher
and Middle Classes of Society[144],” a work to which I have already
referred, as an admirable system of practical and appropriate ethics,
has very explicitly and forcibly delivered his sentiments on this
interesting subject. “The charge,” he says, “may have been made on
partial and insufficient grounds; but the existence of it should excite
the efforts of every conscientious Physician to rescue himself from
the general stigma. It should stimulate him, not to affect a sense of
Religion which he does not entertain, but openly to avow that which
he actually feels.... If the charge be in some measure true, it is of
importance to the Physician to ascertain the causes from which the fact
has originated, that he may be the more on his guard against their
influence. The following circumstances may not have been without their
weight. They who are accustomed to deep researches into any branch of
philosophical science; and find themselves able to explain to their own
satisfaction almost every phenomenon, and to account (as they apprehend,)
for almost every effect by the operation of such causes as in ordinary
language are termed _natural_, are apt to acquire extravagant ideas of
the sufficiency of human reason on all subjects: and thus learning to
doubt the necessity, become prejudiced against the belief, of Divine
Revelation. In the next place, they who justly disclaim the empire of
authority in Medical theories, may carelessly proceed to regard religious
doctrines as theories, resting on no other foundation, and deserving of
no better fate. Thirdly, it is to be observed, that men may be divided
into two distinct classes, with respect to the sort of testimony on
which they receive truths of any kind. They who are chiefly addicted
to investigations and reasonings founded on analogy, look primarily
and with extreme partiality to that species of evidence; and, if the
thing asserted appears contrary to the common course of nature, more
especially if it militate against any theory of their own, (and such
persons are much disposed to theorize,) they are above measure reluctant
to admit the reality of it, and withhold their assent until such a
number of particular proofs, incapable of being resolved into fraud or
misconception, is produced, as would have been far more than sufficient
to convince an unbiassed understanding: whereas other men, little used
to analogical enquiries, look not around for such testimony either in
support or in refutation of an extraordinary circumstance affirmed to
them; but readily give credit to the fact on its own distinct proofs, or
from confidence in the veracity and discernment of the relator. It is
evident that Physicians are to be ranked in the class first described,
and are consequently liable to its prejudices: and it is equally evident
that those prejudices will render all on whom they fasten, particularly
averse to recognise the truth of miracles; and will probably prevent
them from examining with impartiality the evidence of a religion founded
on miracles, and perhaps from examining it at all. Fourthly, to the
preceding circumstances must be added the neglect of Divine worship too
customary among persons of the Medical profession. This neglect seems
to have contributed not only to excite and to strengthen the opinion of
their scepticism and infidelity, but sometimes to produce scepticism and
infidelity itself; for it is a natural progress, that he who habitually
disregards the public duties of Religion, should soon omit those which
are private, should speedily begin to wish that Christianity may not
be true, should then proceed to doubt its truth, and at length should
disbelieve it.”

The late Dr. [John] Gregory of Edinburgh, anxious to support the honour
of a profession which he loved, and of which he was a distinguished
ornament, very strenuously repels the charge against it of scepticism
and infidelity. Though his excellent Lectures are doubtless in the
hands of most Physicians, yet I am tempted to make a transcript from
them, because I wish the present important subject to be viewed in the
several lights in which it has been presented to the mind by different
writers of acknowledged probity, information, and judgement. “I think
the charge,” he observes[145], “ill founded, and will venture to say,
that the most eminent of our Faculty have been distinguished for real
piety. I shall only mention as examples, Harvey, Sydenham, Arbuthnot,
Boerhaave, Stahl, and Hoffmann.—It is easy, however, to see whence this
calumny has arisen. Men whose minds have been enlarged by knowledge, who
have been accustomed to think, and to reason upon all subjects with a
generous freedom, are not apt to become bigots to any particular sect or
system. They can be steady to their own principles, without thinking ill
of those who differ from them; but they are impatient of the authority
and control of men, who would lord it over their consciences, and
dictate to them what they are to believe. This freedom of spirit, this
moderation and charity for those of different sentiments, have frequently
been ascribed by narrow-minded people to secret infidelity, scepticism,
or, at least, to lukewarmness in Religion; while some who were sincere
Christians, exasperated by such reproaches, have sometimes expressed
themselves unguardedly, and thereby afforded their enemies a handle to
calumniate them. This, I imagine, has been the real source of that charge
of infidelity, so often and so unjustly brought against Physicians....
The study of Medicine[146], of all others, should be the least suspected
of leading to impiety. An intimate acquaintance with the works of Nature
raises the mind to the most sublime conceptions of the Supreme Being;
and at the same time dilates the heart with the most pleasing views of
Providence. The difficulties that necessarily attend all deep enquiries
into a subject so disproportionate to the human faculties, should not
be suspected to surprise a Physician, who, in his practice, is often
involved in perplexity, even in subjects exposed to the examination of
his senses.

“There are, besides, some peculiar circumstances in the profession of a
Physician, which should naturally dispose him to look beyond the present
scene of things, and engage his heart on the side of Religion. He has
many opportunities of seeing people, once the gay and the happy, sunk
in deep distress, sometimes devoted to a painful and lingering death,
and sometimes struggling with the tortures of a distracted mind. Such
afflictive scenes, one would imagine, might soften any heart, not dead
to every feeling of humanity, and make it reverence that Religion, which
alone can support the soul in the most complicated distresses; that
Religion, which teaches to enjoy life with cheerfulness, and to resign it
with dignity.”

The judicious and animated considerations which are here delivered,
could proceed only from a mind actuated by the principles of virtue
and Religion; and I trust the great majority of Physicians have their
feelings in unison with those of the amiable writer I have quoted. But
there may be some who have been hardened to moral apathy by the very
causes which should excite benevolence and piety. It has been well
remarked by divines and metaphysicians, that _passive impressions_
become progressively weaker by frequent recurrence; and that the heart
is liable to grow callous to scenes of horror and distress, and even to
the view of death itself. This law of nature is intended by the wise and
benignant Author of our frame to answer the most salutary purposes, by
co-operating with another of equal, perhaps superior, force: for _active
propensities_ are formed and gradually strengthened by the like renewal
of the circumstances which excite them. The love of goodness is thus
rendered habitual; and rectitude of conduct is steadily and uniformly
pursued without struggle or perturbation.

The human character then attains the highest excellence of which this
probationary state is capable; and perhaps the Medical profession is more
favourable than any other to the formation of a mental constitution, that
unites in it very high degrees of intellectual and moral vigour; because
it calls forth the steady and unremitting exertions of benevolence, under
the direction of cultivated reason; and, by opening a wider and wider
sphere of duty, progressively augments their reciprocal energies. But
the connection between the laws of impression, and of habit, is not so
determinate and necessary as to be wholly independent of the agent who
is under their influence. By a perversion of the understanding and the
will, they may be, and sometimes are, separated. The affections also,
when the temperament is phlegmatic, subsist only in a languid state; and
are too evanescent to produce a permanently correspondent frame of mind.
If with this coldness of heart a sceptical turn of thinking happen to be
associated, either constitutionally or from the casualties of study and
connections, virtuous principles will gradually decay; all the tender
charities of life will soon be extinguished; a future state will be
either disbelieved or regarded with indifference; and practical atheism
will ensue, with the whole train of evils which result from a denial
of the creative agency of GOD, or His Divine administration. Allowing
this to be an extreme and barely possible case, (a concession which I
am solicitous to grant to my countrymen, notwithstanding what has been
fatally experienced in a neighbouring kingdom,) yet different gradations
towards it may subsist, and the first step should be avoided with
sedulous care. The countervailing power of Religion is here essentially
necessary, because nothing besides can furnish motives to rectitude,
of adequate dignity, weight, and authority. To restore the impressions
of piety which have been lost or impaired, without falling into the
fervours of enthusiasm, or the gloom of superstition, may be an arduous
task, a task that will require time and perseverance to accomplish. But
the attainment will amply repay the labour, by the sweet satisfaction
which a Physician cannot fail to derive from the consciousness that he
exercises his profession under the inspection of a Being Who approves and
will reward every effort to acquire His favour by doing good to mankind.
In his offices of humanity, he will feel an interest and elevation,
of which those can have no conception who regard the human race, (and
consequently the sufferers under their care,) not as the offspring of
GOD, or as expectants of immortality, but as the creatures of a day,
formed by the casual concourse or the natural appetencies of atoms, and
born only to perish. Such degrading and unhappy notions often spring
from a love of paradox, a passion for novel hypothesis, ambition to
be victorious in subtle disputation, and a contempt for established
authority, accompanied for the most part with an implicit submission to
empirics in science, who dogmatize most when they assume the mask of
scepticism. To the successful pursuit of truth it is necessary to bring
a well-disciplined mind, modest and sober in its views, and uninfluenced
not only by vulgar, but by philosophical prejudices, which are far more
dangerous, because more plausible and fascinating. When subjects which
relate to theology are investigated, reverence and humility should be
associated with all our reasonings. No practice is more subversive of
devotional sentiment, than that of carrying into religious discussions
the licentiousness of thought and expression, which young Physicians
are too apt to indulge on Medical topics. He who can suffer himself to
treat his Maker with indifference and with levity, whether it be in
utterance or in contemplation, will soon lose the religious impressions
of reverence, gratitude and love; and his mind will then be prepared for
the systems of impiety and atheism, which of late have been so boldly
promulgated under the imposing name of philosophy. Productions of this
class should be shunned, even by those who are thoroughly grounded in
rational faith; because familiarity with them can hardly fail to impair
the moral sensibilities of the heart. They are “evil communications,”
which forcibly tend to “corrupt good manners.”

To the comprehensive view of a well-educated Physician, the Divine
Being will appear, with the fullest manifestation, in all without and
all within him. Through the several kingdoms of nature, with which he
is intimately acquainted, he traces every where design, intelligence,
power, wisdom, and goodness; and in the frame of his own body, as well
as in the constitution of his mental faculties, he finds especial reason
to conclude, that, above all the other works of the creation, “he is
fearfully and wonderfully made[147].” The daily offices of his profession
disclose to him irrefragable proofs of the providence and moral
government of GOD. Health, as consisting in the soundness and vigour
of the bodily organs, and in their complete aptitude for exertion and
enjoyment, is doubtless of inestimable consideration. But the occasional
suspension of this blessing may be necessary to obviate the abuses to
which it is liable, to evince its high value, to remedy the injuries it
may have sustained, and to insure its future more permanent duration. A
strong constitution is too often made subservient to sensuality, ebriety,
and other licentious indulgences, which, if not seasonably interrupted by
the experience of consequential suffering, would prove destructive to the
animal economy, and bring on premature decrepitude or death. Diseases,
under these circumstances, furnish a beneficial restraint, and preserve
the mind from contamination, whilst they are often the remedies which
nature has kindly provided for the restoration of the vital functions.
A good, which has been lost and beneficently restored, will be prized
according to its high desert; and, being cherished with assiduous care,
will be prolonged and applied to its proper uses in the great business of
life. But sickness, it must be acknowledged, is not always remedial in
its tendency; and frequently produces degrees of protracted languishment
and pain, grievous to endure, and obstructive of those active offices,
which, in his present sphere, man is called upon to perform. There are
duties, however, of another class, not less essential to the improvement
and excellence of his moral and religious character; and where is a
school to be found like the chamber of sickness for meekness, patience,
resignation, gratitude, and devout trust in GOD? There pride is humbled,
the angry passions subside, animosities cease, and the vanities of the
world lose their bewitching attractions. False associations are there
corrected, true estimates are formed; and, whilst the passive virtues
are cultivated in the suffering individual, all who minister to him have
their best dispositions exercised and improved. Tenderness, humanity,
sympathy, friendship, and domestic love, on such occasions, find that
sphere which is peculiarly adapted to their exertion; and all the softer
charities derive from these sources their highest refinements[148].

Rational theism leads the mind, by fair and necessary induction, to
extend its views to Revelation. He who has discovered the Divine
wisdom, power, and goodness, through the various works of creation,
will feel a solicitude to make farther advances in sacred knowledge;
and, the more profoundly he venerates the Author of his being, the more
earnest will he be to become acquainted with His will, with the means
of conciliating His favour, with the duration of his own existence, and
with his future destination. Several distinguished characters in the
heathen world have in a very explicit manner testified the truth of this
observation. Suffice it to state only the following remarkable passages
from Plato[149]:—“A divine revelation is necessary to explain the true
worship of GOD—to add authority to moral precepts—to assist our best
endeavours in a virtuous course—to fix the future rewards and punishments
of virtuous and vicious conduct—and to point out some acceptable
expiation for sin.” He introduces Socrates, assuring Alcibiades, “that
in a future time a divine person will appear, who, in pure love to
man, shall remove all darkness from his mind, and instruct him how to
offer his prayers and praises in the most acceptable way to the Divine
Being.” The privileges which this intelligent and amiable philosopher
ardently looked for, we happily enjoy. Christianity has “brought life and
immortality to light[150];” and the Gospel is the sacred charter of our
expected inheritance of felicity. To regard with indifference what is so
momentous, is the grossest folly; to be dissatisfied with its evidence,
argues the want of discernment and of candour; and to reject it, without
deliberate and conscientious investigation, is a high degree of impiety:
the appeal, however, must finally be made to the judgement of every
individual; and we may humbly hope, that He Who knoweth our frame, will
pity intellectual infirmity, and pardon involuntary error.


NOTE IX. Chap. ii. § 31. p. 66.

_Union in consultation of senior and junior Physicians._

“Heat and vivacity in age,” says Bacon[151], “is an excellent composition
for business. Young men are fitter to invent than to judge, fitter for
execution than for counsel, and fitter for new projects than for settled
business; for the experience of age, in things that fall within the
compass of it, directeth them, but in new things abuseth them. The errors
of young men are the ruin of business; but the errors of aged men amount
but to this, that more might have been done or sooner. Young men, in the
conduct and manage of actions, embrace more than they can hold; stir more
than they can quiet; fly to the end without consideration of the means
and degrees; pursue some few principles, which they have chanced upon,
absurdly; care not to innovate, which draws unknown inconveniences; use
extreme remedies at first; and, that which doubleth all errors, will not
acknowledge or retract them; like an unruly horse, that will neither
stop nor turn. Men of age object too much, consult too long, adventure
too little, repent too soon, and seldom drive business home to the full
period, but content themselves with a mediocrity of success. Certainly
it is good to compound employments of both; for that will be good for
the present, because the virtues of either age may correct the defects
of both; and good for succession, that young men may be learners, while
men in age are actors; and lastly, good for extern accidents, because
authority followeth old men, and favour and popularity youth. But for the
moral part, perhaps youth will have the pre-eminence, as age hath for the
politic.”


[NOTE X. Chap. iv. § 2. p. 79.

_On Wills._

In case of intestacy if a man leave a wife and children, the wife takes
one third of the personal estate, and the other two thirds belong to
the child or children. If the deceased leave a wife, but no child, one
half of his personal estate will descend to his wife, and the other half
will be divisible among his nearest of kindred, in the same manner as
the whole would have been divisible if he had left no wife. But under no
circumstances is the wife entitled to more than half of her husband’s
estate, if he die intestate. The father of an intestate without issue
is entitled to one half of his estate if he leave a widow, and to the
whole if he leave none. When the nearest of kindred are the mother and
the brothers and sisters, the personal estate is divisible into equal
portions, one of which will belong to the mother, and one to each of the
brothers and sisters[152]

By Stat. 1 Vict. c. 26, one settled rule is established, which is
applicable to every species of Wills and every description of property;
it being enacted that no Will shall be valid unless it shall be in
writing, and signed at the foot or end thereof by the testator, or by
some other person in his presence and by his direction. Every will must
have at least two witnesses, who must be present at the same time during
the signature of the testator, and must attest and subscribe the Will
in the presence of the testator:—but no particular form of attestation
is necessary.—If a person to whom a legacy is given, be witness to a
Will, he forfeits his legacy; but a creditor may be a witness to a Will
without forfeiting his debt, and also an executor without invalidating
his appointment to the executorship.]


NOTE XI. Chap. iv. § 2. p. 83.

_Partial insanity, with general intelligence. Lucid interval._

Sir Matthew Hale has stated[153], that “There is a _partial_ insanity of
mind; and a _total_ insanity. The former is either in respect to things,
_quoad hoc vel illud insanire_; some persons, that have a competent
use of reason in respect of some subjects, are yet under a particular
_dementia_ in respect of some particular discourses, subjects, or
applications; or else it is particular in respect of degrees; and this is
the condition of very many, especially melancholy persons, who for the
most part discover their defect in excessive fears and griefs, and yet
are not wholly destitute of the use of reason; and this partial insanity
seems not to excuse them in the committing of any offence for its matter
capital; for doubtless most persons that are felons of themselves, and
others, are under a degree of partial insanity, when they commit these
offences.... The person that is absolutely mad for a day, killing a
man in that distemper, is equally not guilty, as if he were mad without
intermission. But such persons as have their lucid intervals (which
ordinarily happens between the full and change of the moon,) in such
intervals have usually at least a competent use of reason, and crimes
committed by them in these intervals are of the same nature, and subject
to the same punishment, as if they had no such deficiency; nay, the
alienations and contracts made by them in such intervals are obliging to
their heirs and executors.”

Partial insanity and general intelligence may subsist in various degrees
and proportions to each other in different persons, and even in the
same person at different times. If Socrates had lived at this period,
and had not only professed himself to be governed by the influences
of a familiar spirit, or demon, but had also uniformly regulated his
conversation and actions by this persuasion, he would have been justly
chargeable with derangement of mind, notwithstanding the profound wisdom
which he displayed in his instructions concerning morals and the conduct
of life. Lord Herbert of Cherbury was highly distinguished both for
talents and erudition: but, having unfortunately adopted prejudices
against Christianity, he wrote an elaborate work entitled, “De Veritate,
prout distinguitur a Revelatione;” and, knowing it would meet with
much opposition, he remained some time in anxious suspense about the
publication of it. Providence, however, as he informs us in his own
biographical memoirs, kindly interposed, and determined his wavering
resolutions. “Being thus doubtful in my chamber, one fair day in the
summer, my casement being opened towards the south, the sun shining
clear, and no wind stirring, I took my book, ‘De Veritate,’ in my hand,
and kneeling on my knees, devoutly said these words:—‘O Thou eternal GOD,
... I am not satisfied enough whether I shall publish this book, “De
Veritate;” if it be for Thy glory, I beseech Thee give me some sign from
heaven; if not, I shall suppress it.’ I had no sooner spoken these words,
but a loud though yet gentle noise came from the heavens, (for it was
like nothing on earth,) which did so comfort and cheer me, that I took my
petition as granted, and that I had the sign I demanded; whereupon also
I resolved to print my book.” This was not a temporary delusion of the
imagination, but continued a permanent object of belief through life. And
the impression was more extraordinary, and more indicative of an unsound
mind, because Lord Herbert’s chief argument against Christianity is,
the improbability that Heaven shall reveal its laws _only to a portion
of the earth_. For how could he, who doubted of a _partial_, confide in
an _individual_, revelation? or is it possible that he could rationally
think his book of sufficient importance to extort a declaration of
the Divine will, when the interest and happiness of a fourth part of
mankind were deemed by him objects inadequate to the like display of
goodness[154].

The history of the Rev. Simon Browne still more remarkably exemplifies
the union of vigour and imbecility, of rectitude and perversion in
the same understanding. The loss of his wife and of his only son so
powerfully affected him, that he desisted from the duties of his clerical
function, and could not be persuaded to join in any act of worship to the
Deity, either public or private. “He imagined that Almighty GOD, by a
singular instance of Divine power, had, in a gradual manner, annihilated
in him the thinking substance, and utterly divested him of consciousness:
that, though he retained the human shape, and the faculty of speaking, in
a manner that appeared to others rational, he had all the while no more
notion of what he said than a parrot. And, very consistently with this,
he looked upon himself as no longer a moral agent, a subject of reward or
punishment.” In this conviction he continued with very little variation,
to the close of life. Yet, whilst under the influence of this strange
phrenzy, his faculties, in all other respects, appeared to be in full
vigour. He applied himself with ardour to his studies; and was so acute
a disputant, that his friends were wont to say, “he could reason as if
possessed of _two_ souls.” Indeed, both his imagination and his judgement
were so improved as to surpass the state in which they subsisted during
his perfect sanity[155].

In J. J. Rousseau, we have a most interesting example of morbid
sensibility and depraved imagination, combined with extensive knowledge
and pre-eminent genius. It is said by Madame de Staël[156] that
“sometimes he would part with you, with all his former affection; but,
if an expression had escaped you, which might bear an unfavourable
construction, he would recollect it, examine it, exaggerate it, perhaps
dwell upon it for a week, and conclude by a total breach with you. Hence
it was, that there was scarce a possibility of undeceiving him; for the
light which broke in upon him at once, was not sufficient to efface the
wrong impressions which had taken place so gradually in his mind. It was
extremely difficult too to continue long on an intimate footing with him:
a word, a gesture, furnished him with matter of profound meditation; he
connected the most trifling circumstances, like so many mathematical
propositions, and conceived his conclusion to be supported by the
evidence of demonstration[157].”

I have hazarded an opinion in the text, contrary to what, I believe, is
usually adopted by lawyers, that there may be cases of partial insanity
with a high degree of general intelligence, in which the individual
ought not to be precluded from the privilege of making a last will
and testament. To deny the testamentary qualification to one, who,
notwithstanding some false predominant conception, has been held capable
of managing his concerns with discretion, and whose bequests discover
no traces of a disturbed imagination, or unsound judgement, seems to be
inconsistent both with wisdom and with natural justice. Such a person,
I presume, is capable of acquiring property by legacy, by bargain, by
transfer, by industry, or by office; and he is not prohibited during life
from giving or expending possessions thus obtained. Why then does the law
deprive him of the right of bequeathing after death, that which he might
have dispensed, when alive, without control? Whatever be the opinion
which a Medical practitioner may have entertained concerning the capacity
or incapacity for making a will of one under these circumstances, it can
hardly be necessary to observe, that his evidence, when called for in a
course of legal enquiry, should be delivered explicitly, and without any
bias from his pre-conceptions. On the point litigated it is the exclusive
province of the judge and jury to decide, after a full investigation of
the case.

To determine the existence of a lucid interval in the delirium of fever,
or in the more permanent alienation of mind which constitutes insanity,
the testimony of a Physician is sometimes required in courts of law. It
will be incumbent on him, therefore, to possess a clear and definite
opinion on the subject, founded both on the nature of the malady, and the
state of the patient. The cessation of febrile delirium is not difficult
to ascertain, because the rational faculties, being unimpaired by a
short suspension, at once manifest their renewal by signs which cannot
be misunderstood; but the complete remission of madness is only to be
decided by reiterated and attentive observation. Every action and even
gesture of the patient should be sedulously watched, and he should be
drawn into conversations at different times that may insensibly lead
him to develope the false impressions under which he labours. He should
also be employed occasionally in business or offices connected with,
and likely to renew, his wrong associations. If these trials produce
no recurrence of insanity, he may, with full assurance, be regarded as
legally _compos mentis_ during such period, even though he should relapse
a short time afterward into his former malady.


[NOTE XII. Chap. iv. § 5. p. 85.

_On the new Lunatic Act._

By Lord Ashley’s new “Act for the Regulation of the Care and Treatment of
Lunatics,” (8 and 9 Vict. c. 100.) many alterations were made in the old
law, of which the following are some of the most important[158].

We have, in the first place, secured by this act a permanent body of six
able and experienced gentlemen to officiate as visiting Commissioners,
three of whom are barristers, and three are physicians, and who are
required to devote their time exclusively to the performance of their
official duties. They are not permitted to hold any other office for
which they derive remuneration, or to be connected either directly or
indirectly with any public or private establishments for the reception
of the insane; neither can they exercise their respective professions
of law and medicine. They receive a salary of £1500 per annum; and the
appointment is for life. They are empowered not only to visit private
lunatic asylums, but gaols, workhouses, and hospitals,—in fact, every
place in which insane persons are confined. They are to institute the
most rigid scrutiny into their condition, with the view of ascertaining
whether they are unjustly confined, or improperly treated; and, if such
should be the case, to report accordingly to the Lord Chancellor, who is
invested with full authority to redress any injury which may have been
inflicted.

With respect to the medical certificates required of those who have
the power of consigning a fellow-creature to an asylum, formerly, the
Physician, Surgeon, or Apothecary, was merely called upon to certify to
the abstract fact of the presence of unsoundness of mind in any given
case; but, according to the present law, it is necessary for the person
signing it to state the facts in connexion with the case upon which he
has founded his opinion. Independently of thus affording an additional
protection to the public, a body of valuable information will be
obtained, which may be turned by the Commissioners to useful account. In
connexion with this branch of the subject may be mentioned the Medical
“Case Book,” which the Act requires every Medical superintendent of
the insane to keep for the inspection of the Commissioners. He is not
merely (as under the old law,) to enter the name, form of the malady,
the place of abode, age, and social condition of each patient intrusted
to his care, but he is, at the same time, to give in writing a correct
description of the medicine and other remedies prescribed for the
treatment of his disorder.

Among the minor, but still important, amendments effected in the law,
the following may be mentioned: the Act enables a proprietor of an
asylum to retake a patient who may have escaped from confinement. Again,
parties guilty of ill-treating a patient may be proceeded against
for misdemeanour. Individuals considering themselves to have been
ill-treated, or wilfully neglected, may, after having regained their
liberty, obtain, upon application to the Secretary of the Commissioners,
a copy of the medical certificates and order with the view to legal
proceedings. In the case of the death of any patient, a statement of the
cause of death, with the name of any person who may have been present,
is to be drawn up and signed by the Medical attendant, a copy of which
is to be sent to the Commissioners. Patients may now be transferred,
with the consent of the party signing the order, from one licensed house
to another, without renewing the medical certificates; while, under
the former Act, the proprietor had to procure fresh certificates for
each patient before such a change of residence could be effected. The
Commissioners have the power of making a night visitation to any house
in which they may have reason to believe that the patients are subjected
to ill-treatment. No patient pronounced by the Medical superintendent
to be “dangerous” can be removed from an establishment, unless for the
purpose of transferring him to another, without the consent of the
Commissioners. The Commissioners also have the power of regulating the
dietary of pauper patients confined in licensed houses and hospitals.
There is to be a weekly meeting of the board for the consideration of,
and adjudication upon, any matters touching the working of this Act,
which will very much facilitate the practical operation of the law, as
the Commissioners have the power to apply an immediate remedy for any
abuse which may be brought under their notice.

Proprietors of asylums are by the new law much more effectually protected
than under the former Act. If a party insane, or alleged to be so, is
received into a licensed house or hospital, with a written order for
his reception, and two medical certificates, the person so admitting
him, having complied with the provisions of the act of parliament,
is protected from any vexatious actions which might be brought
against him by persons representing themselves to have been unjustly
confined and detained. The Act enables the proprietor, superintendent,
servants, and any person engaged in receiving, detaining, retaking, and
confining a person legally certified to be insane, to plead the order
and certificates in bar of all proceedings at law. No action can be
maintained against any individual who has in respect of such persons
kept within the strict letter of the enactment.

Again, the Act allows the superintendent and proprietor fourteen days to
retake a patient who may have made his escape from an asylum, without the
necessity of having to procure a fresh order and medical certificate.

But perhaps the most important provision in the new Act, is that which
relates to single patients in unlicensed houses and cottages. By the
present Act, no one insane, or said to be so, can be sent to, or received
in, any unlicensed place, unless two medical certificates have been
obtained certifying to the patient’s insanity. The person taking charge
of such patient is immediately to make a return of his name to the
Commissioners, and he is subject to their visitation. The friends or
relatives of the patients are compelled by the Act to appoint a Medical
superintendent to visit occasionally persons confined in unlicensed
places, who is required to enter into a “Medical Visitation Book” all the
particulars connected with each case, with an account of the medical and
moral treatment adopted. This book is to be open to the inspection of the
Commissioners.

By this Act, therefore, (irrespectively of many minor improvements,) four
important amendments in the law relating to the regulation of lunatics
and lunatic asylums are introduced. First, by the establishment of a
permanent body of experienced Commissioners, authorized to inspect
every place in which the insane are confined, (excepting those placed
under the care of persons who derive no remuneration for undertaking
their management, or those who have been the subject of a commission of
lunacy, and who are residing with the committee appointed by the Lord
Chancellor,) a more vigilant and searching scrutiny into the condition
of the insane will be enforced. Secondly, the law throws an additional
protection around those who are authorized to keep establishments for
the treatment of insanity. Thirdly, by the alteration required in the
character of the medical certificates, and the statement which the Act
compels every Medical superintendent to keep of the particulars of
the medical treatment adopted by him in each case under his care, a
valuable collection of facts connected with the pathology of insanity
will be recorded, from the study and classification of which important
conclusions may be deduced. Fourthly, the abolition of the cottage
system of treating the insane cannot but be productive of the most
advantageous results. These unhappy persons will now have a fair chance
of being restored to health, and to the enjoyment of their social rights
and privileges. As the objects for which they were formerly confined in
cottages and other unlicensed places—viz. privacy and secrecy—no longer
exist, it is hoped that the insane will now be sent to well conducted
private establishments, where they will have a chance of being restored
to sanity.]


[NOTE XIII. Chap. iv. § 12. p. 102.

_Legal penalties on Duelling._

Simply wounding one’s antagonist in a duel is now a capital offence. To
shoot at a person, though no bodily injury ensue, is a felony punishable
with transportation for life. (Stat. 7 Will. IV. and 1 Vict. c. 85.)
Challenging another to fight a duel, and using opprobrious language with
intent to provoke a person to send a challenge, are misdemeanours at
common law.]


NOTE XIV. Chap. iv. § 13. p. 108.

_Duelling._

In the usages of the ancient Germans, evident traces of duelling may
be discovered. But it was employed by them either as an appeal to the
justice, or to the prescience, of the gods. Velleius Paterculus informs
us that questions, decided amongst the Romans by legal trial, were
terminated amongst the Germans by arms or judicial combat[159]. Tacitus
describes it as a species of divination, by which the future events of
important wars were explored[160]. A captive from the enemy was compelled
to fight with a man selected from their own nation. Each was accoutred
with his proper weapons, and the presage of success was determined by the
issue of the battle. A law is quoted by Stiernhöök[161], which shews
that judicial combat was at first appropriated to points respecting
personal character, and that it was only subsequently extended to
criminal cases and to questions relative to property. The terms of the
law are, “If any man shall say to another these reproachful words, ‘You
are not a man equal to other men,’ or, ‘You have not the heart of a
man,’ and the other shall reply, ‘I am a man as good as you;’ let them
meet on the highway. If he who first gave offence appear, and the person
offended absent himself, let the latter be deemed worse than he was
called; let him not be admitted to give evidence in judgement either for
man or woman, and let him not have the privilege of making a testament.
If the person offended appear, and he who gave the offence be absent,
let him call upon the other thrice with a loud voice, and make a mark
upon the earth, and then let him who absented himself be deemed infamous,
because he uttered words which he durst not support. If both shall appear
properly armed, and the person offended shall fall in the combat, let a
half compensation be paid for his death. But if the person who gave the
offence shall fall, let it be imputed to his own rashness. The petulance
of his tongue hath been fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without
any compensation being demanded for his death.”

Montesquieu, on the authority of Beaumanoir, whom he quotes with great
respect, deduces the rise and formation of the articles relative to
the point of honour from the following particular judicial usages. The
accuser declared in the presence of the judge that such a person had
committed such an action; the accused made answer that he lied; upon
which the judge gave orders for the duel. Thus it became an established
rule, that, whenever the lie was given to a person, it was incumbent
on him to fight. Gentlemen combatted on horseback, completely armed;
villeins fought on foot, and with bâtons. The bâton, therefore, was
regarded as an instrument of affront, because to strike a man with it was
to treat him as a villein. For the like reason, a box on the ear, or blow
on the face, was deemed a contumely, to be expiated with blood; since
villeins alone were liable to receive such disgraceful blows, as it was
peculiar to them to fight with their heads uncovered[162].

Practices like these were so congenial to the proud and martial spirit
of the times, as well as to the superstition which prevailed, that they
became universal throughout Europe. But it is evident that they could not
fail to subvert the regular course of justice, diminish the authority
of government, and violate the sacred ordinances of the Church. For the
clergy uniformly remonstrated against, and even anathematized them, as
adverse to Christianity; and the civil power frequently interposed, to
set bounds to usages, which its authority was too feeble to suppress.
Henry I. of England, in the twelfth century, prohibited trial by combat
in all questions concerning property of small value. Louis VII. of France
issued an edict to the same effect. St. Louis, who was a distinguished
legislator, considering the rude age in which he reigned, attempted a
more perfect jurisprudence by substituting trial by evidence in place of
that by combat. And afterwards it became the policy of every monarch,
who possessed power or talents, to explode these relics of Gothic
barbarism. By degrees the practice became less and less frequent: courts
of judicature acquired an ascendancy; law was studied as a science, and
administered with great regularity; and the ferocious manners of the
inhabitants of Europe yielded to the arts of peace, and to the benefits
of social and civilized life. But an event occurred in the year 1528,
which both revived the practice of single combat, and gave a new form
to it, more absurd and fatal. The political and personal enmity, which
subsisted between the Emperor Charles V. and Francis I., led the former
to commission the French herald, sent to him with a denunciation of war,
to acquaint his sovereign, that he should from that time consider him
not only as a base violator of public faith, but as a stranger to the
honour and probity of a gentleman. Francis instantly sent back the herald
with a cartel of defiance, giving the Emperor the lie, and challenging
him to single combat. Charles accepted the challenge; but, it being
impracticable to settle the preliminaries, this romantic and ridiculous
enterprise of course was never accomplished. The transaction, however,
excited such universal attention, and reflected so much splendour and
dignity on this novel mode of single combat, that every gentleman thought
himself entitled, and even bound in honour, to draw his sword, and to
demand satisfaction of his adversary for affronts trivial and even
imaginary[163]. The best blood in Christendom was shed; personages of the
first distinction were devoted to death; the ease, the familiarity, and
the confidence of private intercourse were interrupted; and war itself
was hardly more destructive to life and to its dearest enjoyments than
this fatal and seductive frenzy[164].

Evils of such magnitude required adequate remedies; and all the terrors
of law were every where exerted to repress them. But they have hitherto
been employed in vain: nor is it likely that sanguinary punishments will
prevail, because the dread of such punishment would be deemed equally
dishonourable with the fear of death in the chances of combat. A heavy
fine, strictly levied, would operate with greater force on some of the
most active principles of the human mind; and if it amounted to half,
or one third, of the convicted person’s fortune, (such portion being
placed in chancery, for the benefit of his heirs or children,) this
privation would not only extend to his comforts and accommodations, but
would be felt as a species of infamy, by depriving him of the means of
maintaining his rank and station in life. Lord Verulam has proposed
the following remedy for duelling; which, if effectual with men of
quality, would soon disgrace the practice amongst those of inferior
degree[165]:—“The fountain of honour is the King and his aspect, and
the access to his person continueth honour in life, and to be banished
from his presence is one of the greatest eclipses of honour that can be;
if his Majesty shall be pleased, that, when this court shall censure
any of these offences in persons of eminent quality, to add this out of
his own power and discipline, that these persons shall be banished and
excluded from his court for certain years, and the courts of his Queen
and Prince, I think there is no man that hath any good blood in him,
will commit an act that shall cast him into that darkness, that he may
not behold his sovereign’s face.” This proposal of Lord Verulam seems to
receive some confirmation from a story related by Lord Shaftesbury in his
“Characteristicks[166].” “A certain gallant of our court, ... being asked
by his friends, why one of his established character for courage and good
sense would answer the challenge of a coxcomb, confessed, ‘that for his
own sex, he could safely trust their judgement; but how should he appear
at night before the maids of honour?’”

Thus the principle on which duelling is founded, is now neither an appeal
to the justice of Heaven, nor an expression of resentment for wrong
sustained; but generally a mere punctilio of honour, which would affix a
stigma on the character for courage of him who omits to offer, and on the
opponent who declines the acceptance of, a challenge. Hence forgiveness
of injury and reparation from the consciousness of having committed it,
those noble sentiments of just and generous minds, are wholly precluded
in the intercourse of fashionable life.

A very able moralist, whom I have often quoted with peculiar
satisfaction, has reduced the question concerning duelling, as now
practised, to this single point: whether a regard for our own reputation
is, or is not, sufficient to justify the taking away the life of
another. “‘A sense of shame,’” says he, “‘is so much torture; and no
relief presents itself otherwise than by an attempt upon the life of our
adversary.’ What then? The distress which men suffer by the want of
money is oftentimes extreme, and no resource can be discovered but that
of removing a life which stands between the distressed person and his
inheritance. The motive in this case is as urgent, and the means much the
same, as in the former; yet this case finds no advocates.

“For the army, where the point of honour is cultivated with exquisite
attention and refinement,” continues the same excellent writer, “I would
establish a _Court of Honour_, with a power of awarding those submissions
and acknowledgements, which it is generally the purpose of a challenge
to obtain; and it might grow into a fashion with persons of rank of all
professions, to refer their quarrels to this tribunal[167].”

An institution, like the one thus forcibly recommended by Dr. Paley,
might probably have prevented the late fatal duel between Colonel
Montgomery and Captain M’Namara. The address of the latter to the
gentlemen of the jury gives just grounds for this opinion, and claims
on that account the attention of the legislature. “Gentlemen,” said he,
“I am a captain in the British Navy. My character you can only hear
from others; but to maintain my character in that station, I must be
respected. When called upon to lead others into honourable danger, I must
not be supposed to be a man who had sought safety by submitting to what
custom has taught others to consider as a disgrace. I am not presuming
to urge any thing against the laws of GOD, or of this land. I know
that, in the eye of religion and reason, obedience to the law, though
against the general feelings of the world, is the first duty, and ought
to be the rule of action: but in putting a construction upon my motives,
so as to ascertain the quality of my actions, you will make allowances
for my situation[168].” In referring to the foregoing disastrous case,
it is proper to notice, that a Surgeon of considerable eminence, who
attended on the field of combat in his _professional capacity_, was on
this account arrested and sent to Newgate by a warrant from the civil
magistrate as a _principal_ in the alleged murder, having been present at
the duel and antecedently privy to it. Nor was he liberated from prison
till the grand jury had rejected the indictment.

It has recently been stated in one of the periodical prints, that a law
to prevent duelling was passed in the general assembly of North Carolina
during their last session, by which it was enacted, “That no person
sending, accepting, or being the bearer of a challenge, for the purpose
of fighting a duel, even though no death should ensue, shall ever after
be eligible to any office of trust, power, or profit in the state, any
pardon or reprieve notwithstanding: and that the said person shall
further be liable to be indicted, and on conviction shall forfeit and
pay the sum of one hundred pounds to the use of the state. And if any
one fight a duel, by which either of the parties shall be killed, then
the survivor, on conviction thereof, shall suffer death without benefit
of clergy; and the seconds shall be considered as accessaries before the
fact, and likewise suffer death[169].”

I shall insert the following communication from my late venerable friend
Dr. Benjamin Franklin, on the subject of duelling, because the deliberate
opinion of a man peculiarly distinguished by perspicacity, soundness
of judgement, and extensive knowledge of the world, cannot fail to be
interesting to the reader. The letter was written in the 79th year of his
age, and evinces the same vein of humour which characterized him through
life. A few passages are omitted, being merely complimentary and personal.

                                “_Passy, near Paris, July 17, 1784._

    “Dear Sir,

    “I received, yesterday, by Mr. White, your kind letter of May
    11th, with the most agreeable present of your new book. I read
    it all before I slept.... It is astonishing that the murderous
    practice of duelling, which you so justly condemn, should
    continue so long in vogue. Formerly, when duels were used to
    determine law-suits from an opinion that Providence would in
    every instance favour truth and right with victory, they were
    more excusable. At present they decide nothing. A man says
    something, which another tells him is a lie. They fight; but,
    whichever is killed, the point in dispute remains unsettled.
    To this purpose they have a pleasant little story here: A
    gentleman in a coffee-house desired another to sit farther from
    him. ‘Why so?’ ‘Because, Sir, you smell offensively.’ ‘That is
    an affront, and you must fight me.’ ‘I will fight you, if you
    insist upon it, but I do not see how that will mend the matter;
    for, if you kill me, I shall smell too; and if I kill you, you
    will smell, if possible, worse than you do at present.’—How can
    such miserable sinners as we are, entertain so much pride as to
    conceive that every offence against our imagined honour merits
    death? These petty princes, in their own opinion, would call
    that sovereign a _tyrant_, who should put one of them to death
    for a little uncivil language, though pointed at his sacred
    person. Yet every one of them makes himself judge in his own
    cause, condemns the offender without a jury, and undertakes
    himself to be the executioner.

    “Our friend Mr. Vaughan may perhaps communicate to you some
    conjectures of mine, relating to the cold of last winter, which
    I sent him in return for the observations on cold of Professor
    Wilson. If he should, and you think them worthy so much notice,
    you may shew them to your Philosophical Society, to which I
    wish all imaginable success. Their rules seem to me excellent.

    “With sincere and great esteem, I have the honour to be your
    most obedient, and most humble servant,

                                                       B. FRANKLIN.”


NOTE XV. Chap. iv. § 16. p. 114.

_Punishment of the crime of Rape._

The atrocity of this crime appears to have been variously estimated at
different periods, and in different countries; if we may judge from the
diversity of punishments inflicted on the perpetrators of it. The reader
will find a copious and interesting enumeration of them in a volume
entitled, “A View of Ancient Laws against Immorality and Profaneness,”
by John Disney, M.A. Cambridge, 1729, fol. I would refer him also to the
“Principles of Penal Law,” by Mr. Eden, now Lord Auckland. As both these
valuable works are out of print, a few extracts from each may form an
acceptable addition to the present note.

“The Burgundian laws provided, that, if the young woman carried off,
returned to her parents actually corrupted, the offender should pay six
times her price; [that is, six times her _weregild_, or legal valuation;]
and also a mulct (to the Crown, I suppose,) of twelve shillings. If he
had not wherewithal to pay this, he should be given up to her parents,
or near relations, to take their revenge of him in what way they
pleased[170].”

By the law of Æthelbert, the first Christian king of Kent, it was
enacted, that, if any person take a young woman by force, he shall
pay her parent or guardian fifty shillings; and shall make a farther
composition for her ransom. If she were espoused, he shall compensate
the husband by an additional payment of twenty shillings: but if she
were with child, the augmented fine shall be five and thirty shillings,
and fifteen more to the king[171].

There is an ordinance of King Alfred, for the punishment of rapes
committed upon country wenches who were servants, an offence which may
be supposed to have been prevalent at that time. It is delivered in the
following terms:—“Si quis coloni mancipium ad stuprum comminetur, quinque
solidis colono emendet, et sexaginta solidis mulctae loco. Si servus
servam ad stuprum coëgerit, compenset hoc virga sua virili. Si quis
puellam tenerae aetatis ad illicitum concubitum comminetur, eodem modo
puniatur, quo ille qui adultae servae hoc fecerit[172].”

By the Welsh laws of Prince Höel Dha, if two women were walking together
without other company, and violence was offered to either or both of
them, it was not punishable as a rape; but if they had a third person
with them, they might claim their full legal redress. If the perpetrator
of a rape, being accused, confessed the fact, besides full satisfaction
to the woman, he was to answer for the crime to his sovereign, by the
present of a silver stand as high as the king’s mouth, and as thick as
his middle finger, with a gold cup upon it, so large as to contain what
he could take off at one draught, and as thick as the nail of a country
fellow who had worked at the plough seven years. If the offender was not
able to make such a present, _virilia membra amittat_.

Sir Edward Coke states this offence as a felony at the common law,
which had a punishment, “under such a condition as no other felony had
the like.” The criminal was adjudged “amittere oculos, quibus virginem
concupivit; amittere etiam testiculos, qui calorem stupri induxerunt.”

In the ancient law of England, exclusive of the punishment inflicted on
the criminal, his horse, greyhound, and hawk, were also subjected to
great corporal infamy: but the woman who was the sufferer might prevent
all the penalties, if, before judgement, she demanded the offender for
her husband. The Roman law was in the same spirit:—“Rapta raptoris aut
mortem aut indotatas nuptias optet;” upon which there arose what was
thought a doubtful case: “Una nocte quidam duas rapuit; altera mortem
optat, altera nuptias[173].”


[NOTE XVI. Chap. iv. § 18. p. 120.

_Medical Evidence at Inquests._

By the Act (6 and 7 Will. 4. cap. 89.) a Medical man is liable to a
penalty of £5 for failing to attend when summoned upon an inquest: he is
entitled to a fee of one guinea for his attendance, and to another guinea
in case of a _post mortem_ examination.]


Deo Gloria.


FOOTNOTES:

[103] Hume’s _Inquiry concerning the Principles of Morals_, sect. vi. pt.
1. (or _Essays_, vol. ii. p. 272.)

[104] See Adam Smith’s _Theory of Moral Sentiments_, pt. vi. sect. 3.
vol. ii. p. 158.

[105] [_Essays_, § 12. (_Works_, vol. ii. p. 271.)]

[106] See the Introduction to _Philosophical and Literary Essays_, by Dr.
James Gregory of Edinburgh, p. clxxxvii.

[107] The learned editor, Lipsius, observes in his note on this passage,
“Persarum similis mos, ... et Cretensium, ... et Graecorum omnium
veterum.”

[108] _Duties of Men_, chap. 12. vol. ii. p. 150.

[109] Chap. 12. vol. ii. p. 159.

[110] [Gisborne calls him “an _eminent_ writer.” There is a similar
instance of Percival’s modesty below, p. 155.]

[111] Percival’s _Medical Ethics_, chap. i. § 23.

[112] [Rom. iii. 8.]

[113] Horace, _Sat._ i. 1. 106.

[114] [Alluding perhaps to _De Mendac._ c. 21. § 42. tom. vi. p. 444. ed.
Bened., or to _Cont. Mendac._ c. 20. § 40. tom. vi. p. 472; but if so,
St. Augustine’s meaning is not quite correctly given in the text.]

[115] _De Jure Belli ac Pacis_, lib. iii. cap. 1. sect. 10 [9?] §§
2-4.—See also cap. 1. sect. 14-16.

[116] Spavan’s Puffendorff, vol. ii. chap. 1. p. 6.

[117] _Ibid._ p. 9.

[118] Leechman’s biographical Preface to Hutcheson’s _System of Moral
Philosophy_, p. xxiv.

[119] _System of Moral Philosophy_, bk. ii. ch. 10. § 4. vol. ii. p. 32.

[120] [Rom. iii. 8.]

[121] _System of Moral Philosophy_, bk. ii. ch. 17. § 7. vol. ii. p. 132.

[122] See Boswell’s _Life of Johnson_, June 13, 1784.

[123] [St. Matth. vii. 12.]

[124] Pliny, _Epist._ iii. 16.

[125] Lady Rachel Russell’s _Letters_; Note to Letter 149.

[126] _Essays_, bk. ii. ch. 37. p. 703. [654. ed. 1711.]

[127] _Anecdotes of some Distinguished Persons_, vol. ii. p. 386.

[128] _Life of Sydenham._ (_Works_, vol. xii. p. 182.)

[129] In the Preface to his _Treatise upon the Small-Pox_.

[130] [In the Dedication to his _Observationes Medicae_.]

[131] Johnson’s _Life of Sydenham_, p. 183.

[132] [§ 1. vol. i. p. 32.]

[133] See Bulæi _Hist. Univers. Paris._, tom. iii. p. 158; Henry’s _Hist.
of Great Britain_, bk. iv. ch. 4. § 1. vol. viii. p. 206.

Dr. Freind has given a somewhat different account of the celebrated
School of Salerno:—“Sunt in eo decem Doctores, qui sibi invicem, juxta
creationis ordinem, succedunt. Candidatorum examinatio severissima est,
quae fit aut in Galeni _Therapeuticis_, aut in primo primi _Canonis_
Avicennae, aut in _Aphorismis_. Is qui Doctoratum ambit unum ac viginti
annos habere debet, (verum hic lapsum subesse autumo, cum scribendum
sit _viginti quinque_ vel _septem_,) ac testimonia proferre, quae per
septem annos eum Medicinae studuisse doceant. Quod si inter Chirurgos
recipi cupiat, anatomiam per anni spatium didicisse hunc oportet:
jurandum ei est, fidelem se ac morigerum Societati futurum, praemia a
pauperibus oblata recusaturum, neque Pharmacopolarum lucri participem
fore. Tum liber in ejus manum traditur, annulus digito induitur, caput
laurea redimitur, atque ipse osculo dimittitur. Multa alia statuta sunt
ad praxeos ordinationem pertinentia; Pharmacopolae praesertim, ut juxta
Medici praecepta componant medicamenta, et ut ea certo pretio divendant,
obligantur.” _Hist. Medic._ (in _Oper. Med._ p. 537.)

[134] Consult Seb. Bacmeisteri _Antiq. Rostock._ [in Westphalen’s _Monum.
Ined. Rer. German._, tom. iii.]; Crevier, _Hist. de l’Univers. de
Paris._, tome i. p. 96; and Robertson’s _Hist. of Charles V._, vol. i.
Note 28.

[135] Johnson’s _Life of Addison_. (_Works_, vol. x. p. 85.)

[136] _Ibid._ (?)

[137] See _Cod. Theodos._ xiii. 3. § 8.

[138] _Annal._ xi. 5, 7.

[139] Of this truth it has been my duty and inclination to offer several
proofs, of unquestionable authority, in different parts of the present
work. Two additional ones now occur to my recollection, which I shall
here insert. Mr. Pope, writing to Mr. Allen concerning his obligations
to Dr. Mead and other Physicians, about a month before his death,
says:—“There is no end of my kind treatment from the Faculty. They are
in general the most amiable companions and the best friends, as well as
the most learned men I know.”—The Rev. Dr. Samuel Parr, in a letter, with
which he honoured me in September 1794, thus expresses himself:—“I have
long been in the habit of reading on Medical subjects; and the great
advantage I have derived from this circumstance is, that I have found
opportunities for conversation and friendship with a class of men, whom,
after a long and attentive survey of literary characters, I hold to be
the most enlightened professional persons in the whole circle of human
arts and sciences.”

[140] Pt. i. § 3.

[141] See _Biographia Britannica_.

[142] [Or _Works_, vol. iii. p. 485.]

[143] [Dr. Parr adds, “and a _Percival_.” See above p. 133.]

[144] Chap. 12. vol. ii. p. 191.

[145] Lect. 2. p. 64.

[146] Lect. 2. p. 68.

[147] [Ps. cxxxix. 14.]

[148] See Percival’s _Father’s Instructions_, pt. iii. p. 312. (_Works_,
vol. i. p. 277.)

[149] [Alluding probably to _Alcib. II._ pp. 141 sq., 150 sq.]

[150] [2 Tim. i. 10.]

[151] _Essays_, § 42. (_Works_, vol. ii. p. 343.)

[152] [See Hudson’s _Directions for Making Wills_, where more minute
information on the subject may be found.]

[153] _Hist. Placitor. Coronae_, pt. i. ch. 4. p. 30.

[154] See Walpole’s _Cat. of Royal and Noble Authors_, vol. i. p. 188;
also Percival’s _Moral and Liter. Dissert._, p. 82. (_Works_, vol. ii. p.
52.)

[155] See _Biogr. Britann._ (ed. Kippis,) Art. “Simon Browne.”

[156] _Lettres sur les Ecrits et le Caractère de J. J. Rousseau._

[157] The reader is referred to Dugald Stewart’s _Philosophy of the Human
Mind_, ch. 7. § 5, for some admirable remarks on the evils which result
from an ill-regulated imagination.

[158] For further details the reader may consult Dr. Winslow’s edition
of the Act, (1845, small 8vo.) from which the following observations are
taken, p. 32 &c.

[159] _Hist. Rom._ ii. 118.

[160] _German._ c. 10.

[161] _De Jure Sueonum et Gothorum Vetusto_, i. 7. p. 76; quoted by
Robertson, _Hist. of Charles V._, vol. i. Note 22.

[162] See Montesquieu, _De l’Esprit des Loix_, liv. xxviii. ch. 20.

[163] See Robertson’s _Hist. of Charles V._ bk. v.

[164] The History of Lord Herbert of Cherbury, who lived in the reigns
of Queen Elizabeth and James I., fully exemplifies the folly and danger
of adopting false principles of honour. During the abode of this
romantic nobleman at the Duke of Montmorenci’s, about twenty-four miles
from Paris, it happened one evening that a daughter of the Duchess de
Ventadour, of about ten or eleven years of age, went to walk in the
meadows with his lordship and several other gentlemen and ladies. The
young lady wore a knot of riband on her head, which a French chevalier
snatched away, and fastened to his hatband. He was desired to return it,
but refused. The lady then requested Lord Herbert to recover it for her.
A race ensued; and the chevalier, finding himself likely to be overtaken,
made a sudden turn, and was about to deliver his prize to the young
lady, when Lord Herbert seized his arm, and cried out, “I give it you.”
“Pardon me,” said the lady, “it is he who gives time.” “Madam,” replied
Lord Herbert, “I will not contradict you, but if the chevalier do not
acknowledge that I constrain him to give the riband, I will fight with
him.” And the next day, he sent him a challenge, “being bound thereto,”
says he, “by the oath taken when I was made Knight of the Bath.” See the
Life of Lord Herbert of Cherbury; also Percival’s _Moral and Literary
Dissertations_, p. 299. (_Works_, vol. ii. p. 206.)

[165] _Charge against Duels._ (_Works_, vol. iv. p. 403.)

[166] _Advice to an Author_, vol. i. p. 273.

[167] Paley’s _Moral and Political Philosophy_, bk. iii. pt. ii. ch. 9.

[168] See _Annual Register_, for 1803, p. 14*.

[169] See _Courier_, March 9, 1803.

[170] [Disney, Tit. i. chap. 9. p. 174.]

[171] [See Disney, _ibid._ p. 177 &c.]

[172] [See Wilkins, _Concil. Magn. Britann._, vol. i. p. 193.]

[173] [See Eden, chap. 22. p. 239.]




_Published (uniform in 16mo.) by John Churchill, Princes Street, Soho,
London._


LIFE OF DR. BATEMAN. _In the Press._

DR. WARE ON THE DUTIES AND QUALIFICATIONS OF PHYSICIANS. 1849.

CODE OF ETHICS OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION. 1849. 8_d._

REV. F. D. MAURICE ON THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF MEDICAL STUDENTS. _Second
Edition._ 1849. 9_d._

LIFE OF MR. TRYE. 1848. 1_s._

GISBORNE ON THE DUTIES OF PHYSICIANS, resulting from their Profession.
1847. 1_s._

HUFELAND ON THE RELATIONS OF THE PHYSICIAN to the Sick, to the Public,
and to his Colleagues. 1846. 9_d._

LIFE OF DR. GEORGE CHEYNE. 1846. 2_s._ 6_d._

LIFE OF DR. BURDER. 1845. 4_s._

BURDER’S LETTERS FROM A SENIOR TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN, on the Importance
of Promoting the Religious Welfare of his Patients. 1845. 6_d._

LIFE OF SIR JAMES STONHOUSE. 1844. 4_s._ 6_d._

ADDRESS TO A MEDICAL STUDENT. _Second Edition. In the Press._

PRAYERS FOR THE USE OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION. _Second Edition._ 1849.
1_s._ 6_d._

_The profits of these little works, if any, will be given to some Medical
Charity._

ANECDOTA SYDENHAMIANA. _Second Edition._ 16_mo._ 1847. 2_s._




PROSPECTUS.


    “_It would certainly form an agreeable task, and might not
    be unprofitable, to rescue from oblivion the memorable
    instances of Medical men, in whom piety was combined with high
    attainments and professional eminence, whose acquirements were
    duly appreciated by their contemporaries, and whose learned or
    useful writings have transmitted their names with honour to
    posterity._” (Pearson’s _Life of Hey_, Preface, § 7.)

1. It is proposed (with GOD’S assistance,) to publish in a series the
lives of those Physicians who have been most eminent for their piety, in
whatever age and country they may have lived.

2. The profits (if any,) arising from these publications will be given
eventually to some Medical Charity.

3. In this undertaking the Editor will be happy to receive literary
assistance from such of his friends as may take an interest in the work.

4. As the whole of the present expense and risk falls upon the Editor
alone, he will gladly accept any donations or subscriptions in aid of the
design from persons who may feel an interest in it.

5. The lives will of course vary much in length, some forming each a
volume of itself, and others constituting a distinct class consisting of
much shorter notices. The volumes will not be published in any particular
order, but they will be strictly uniform in size, type, &c.

6. The number of volumes to be published annually must depend on the
amount of money received either from the sale of the works, or from the
donations of friends.

7. The Editor will be answerable for the general accuracy and fidelity of
the narratives, for the tone and spirit of the whole work, and for the
selection of the lives to be published; and accordingly he will be deeply
pained, if any person of piety and good sense shall consider, either
that he has inserted in his list any name but those of Physicians really
fearing GOD and loving CHRIST, or that he has published any life written
in a low or unchristian spirit: but, as it is proposed to comprehend
Physicians of all ages and countries, and not merely those who have been
members of the Church of England, (still less those who have belonged
to this or that particular party in it,) it is manifest that neither
the Editor nor the Writers are to be considered responsible for the
particular theological opinions which any of these individuals may have
held.

_Oxford, All Saints’ Day, 1844._


The Editor will be much obliged to any one who will furnish him with any
Letters, Papers, or information of any kind, relating to the life and
character of the following individuals.

    JOHN ABERCROMBIE, M.D.;              born 1781, died 1844.
    THOMAS BATEMAN, M.D.;                born 1778, died 1820.
    SIR RICHARD BLACKMORE, M.D.;         born ----, died 1729.
    WILLIAM BLAIR;                       born ----, died 1822.
    HERMAN BOERHAAVE, M.D.;              born 1668, died 1738.
    SIR THOMAS BROWNE, M.D.;             born 1605, died 1682.
    JOHN CHEYNE, M.D.;                   born 1777, died 1836.
    JOHN FOTHERGILL, M.D.;               born 1712, died 1780.
    JOHN D. GODMAN, M.D.;                born 1794, died 1830.
    JOHN MASON GOOD, M.D.;               born 1766, died 1827.
    ALBERT VON HALLER, M.D.;             born 1708, died 1777.
    JOHN HAMON, M.D.;                    born 1618, died 1687.
    DAVID HARTLEY, M.D.;                 born 1705, died 1757.
    PHILIP HECQUET, M.D.;                born 1661, died 1737.
    WILLIAM HEY;                         born 1736, died 1819.
    JAMES HOPE, M.D.;                    born 1801, died 1841.
    CHRIST. WILL. HUFELAND, M.D.;        born 1762, died 1836.
    JAMES KENNEDY, M.D.;                 born ----, died 1827.
    JAMES MEIKLE;                        born 1730, died 1799.
    PHILIP SYNG PHYSICK, M.D.;           born 1768, died 1837.
    BENJAMIN RUSH, M.D.;                 born 1745, died 1813.
    JOHN RUTTY, M.D.;                    born 1698, died 1775.
    THOMAS SYDENHAM, M.D.;               born 1624, died 1689.
    SAM. AUG. AND. DAV. TISSOT, M.D.;    born 1728, died 1797.
    MICHAEL UNDERWOOD, M.D.;             born 1737, died 1820.
    THOMAS WILLIS, M.D.;                 born 1622, died 1675.

_Sept., 1849._



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDICAL ETHICS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


